EUCLID. GEOM.

AXIOMS, OR
Pronouncements.

I.

A MAGNITUDE, measuring any number of
magnitudes, measures also the compound one from
them.

II.

A MAGNITUDE, measuring any magnitude,
measures also every magnitude which that one
measures.

III.

A MAGNITUDE measuring a whole magnitude,
and a part taken away, measures also the remainder.

T H E S E axioms, insofar as they pertain to numbers, were set forth
by us in the last three pronouncements of book 7. Wherefore since the
same reasoning holds in magnitudes, there is no reason that we should
repeat their demonstrations here in vain, especially since, word for word,
they can be transferred hither, only changing the word “number” into the
word “magnitude”.

M O R E O V E R, because in this book we had to depart from the
numbering which Theon follows in Euclid’s propositions, as we shall say
at prop. 13, and likewise because in all things we have neglected the series
of Campanus, as we explained at the beginning of the first book;
we took care that a double number be placed in the margin opposite the
propositions, of which the upper shows Theon’s order, the lower however
shows Campanus’s series. But if only one number is found in the margin,
then there is no difference at that point between
Theon

BOOK 9. X.

Theorem, and the discrepancy of Campanus, understand, as far as
the numbering of the propositions is concerned.

THEOR. I. PROPOS. I.

WITH two unequal magnitudes proposed,
if from the greater there is taken away
more than the half; and from that which
remains, again there is taken away more
than the half; and if this is always done:
there will at last be left some magnitude
which will be less than the lesser proposed magnitude.

LET there be proposed two unequal magnitudes
A B, and C, of which A B is the greater. I say that if from A B there is
taken away more than the half; and from that which remains, again more
than the half; and if this is always done: there will at last be left some
magnitude which is less than C. Let C be multiplied as many times until
the magnitude made D E is greater than A B, so that D E is a multiple of C,
the nearest greater than A B. Let D E be divided into parts D F, F G,
G E, equal to C; let there be sub-
tracted from A B more than
the half A H, and from the re-
mainder H B more than the
half H I; and let this always be done, until the parts of A B are equal in
number to the parts of D E. Let therefore now the parts A H, H I, I B be
as many as are D F, F G, G E. Therefore since D E is greater than A B:
but from D E there has been taken away D F, less than the half, or at least
the half, if D E is double of C; and from A B however more than the half
A H. The remainder E F will be less than the remainder H B. For since
D E is greater than A B; thus if from D E the half is taken away, and also
from A B the half, the remainder from D E is also greater than the
remainder from A B. If therefore from D E there is taken away less than
the half, or at least the half, and from A B more than the
half;