EUCLID. ELEMENTS. GEOMETRY.

certain magnitudes of whatever kind, if only proposed, can be called determinate, in comparison with which
all the remaining kinds will be named indeterminate, that indeed (as we said) because of the scarcity of
affinity of numbers among themselves. For Euclid will teach in this tenth [book] to generate some of these,
and lest the task seem to approach the infinite, he will show that a general infinity can be produced
by a single theorem. Hence let us consider that so hidden and obscure secret of this discipline,
since we have said that units are, by the first definition of the seventh [book], as it were
insoluble by their own nature. And therefore (since it is referred to quantities) we easily perceive it to be
geometrical and therefore continuous and uncut, when compared among numbers,
which is the true and only begetter of numbers, [and] contains in itself the nature of continuous quantity; and since
it is insoluble, we shall necessarily confess it to be the smallest part of all numbers, because
it cannot be cut into smaller parts by numbers; but if (as we said in the seventh) its quantity is cut by
number, the smallest part always returns to units. If therefore to a magnitude cut by
some units, a magnitude is compared, whose quantity, when compared to the prior quantity,
falls into that cutting of the unit, which cannot be expressed by any number measuring that quantity of the unit,
but which, by whatever multiplication of that quantity by a decrement being made, always, when
compared, falls at the extreme of the magnitude, or boundary, into the cutting of the unit: it will be clear
that the denomination of that compared quantity is held beyond the powers of numbers, especially
of those numbering the prior quantity: since if that extreme, by some multiplication
of a decrement of the unit being made, were to fall into some boundary of those units, and not
into a cutting of the unit, the quantities of that multiplication would (at least) both
number the magnitudes of the units. Therefore their comparison would not be held beyond the powers of numbers,
but would be expressed by numbers. Since therefore it cannot be expressed by numbers, it lacks determination
and therefore certainty: for the certainty of the quantity of comparison depends on the expression of numbers.
Therefore that which cannot be expressed by numbers, for this reason deserves to be called an indeterminate comparison:
and therefore the quantity which produces that comparison to another quantity, by the same law can be called an indeterminate quantity.
Moreover this, deprived of every denomination, becomes mute: because it has burst forth into such wickedness,
that it has attempted to dissolve that inviolate integrity of the unit, which admits no denomination of section.

But furthermore, following that which Zambertius says in the preliminary to perspective, namely that he had seen Euclid’s
copies, worn away by moths and decay, at the Socratic [place]. Indeed we can infer
that this tenth [book] of his, or some other, suffered some such damage. For Euclid calls this
proposed magnitude (which makes a line) “rational” by this word ῥητὴ,
(which properly bears “certain” and “determinate” and “which can safely be spoken”) in the fifth
definition. But the sixth brings forward that all commensurable [magnitudes] with the same proposed certain [one] are likewise certain
by the same word ῥητὰς, from the habit of commensuration indeed, because the commensurable are
certain when proposed, and they themselves will be certain for that reason; but when by the seventh definition he argues from
privation, he departs from sense. For what “habit” adds, “privation” takes away. For the sixth will say
that because they were commensurable with the certain, therefore they are certain. The seventh therefore, because they themselves
were incommensurable with the certain, says it necessarily follows that they are uncertain (with a privative negation prefixed).
But why Theon put in place of this word ἀῤῥητὰς, which is truly opposed to ῥηταὶ by privation,
judging ἄλογον to be the opposite of the certain or determinate, [namely] “irrational,”
we cannot sufficiently wonder. But since it has nothing in common with reason, and moreover
with absurdities—although he always uses ῥητὸ while affirming this—nevertheless wishing to assign
an opposite to it, he sets down ἄλογον throughout this whole tenth [book], which is no small inconvenience to learners.

For