TENTH BOOK.                                                                 99

OF EUCLID

THE TENTH
ELEMENT.

DEFINITIONS.
I.

Commensurable magnitudes are said to be those which
the same measure measures.

Euclid in the preceding nine books completed the consideration of the four kinds of number, and that sufficiently
for understanding geometrical matters. Now in this tenth book he proceeds to the discussion of commensurable
and incommensurable lines, for the sake of which we said above that he undertook the treatment of numbers.
For without knowledge of these lines many magnitudes, both solid and plane, can neither be perfectly understood,
nor be applied with clarity to use; because the sides of most of them are incommensurable. Which can also be said
of the planes themselves, since in these too incommensurables often occur, as we shall demonstrate toward the end
of this book. And because this book is very obscure with difficulties, on account of the obscurity of the lines of which
it treats, I shall strain every nerve of my industry upon it, so that from those things which Euclid has demonstrated,
it may be made so plain and easy that, without great labor, it can be grasped by anyone who has rightly understood
only the demonstrations of the preceding books. Nor indeed can I go along with the opinion of those who think that
for understanding it there is required that part of Arithmetic which treats of the roots of numbers, both rational and
irrational, as they call them. On the contrary, I am persuaded that a perfect knowledge of that part of Arithmetic
depends upon this tenth book; so far am I from thinking that the treatment of roots is required in order that this book
be easily understood. I would not deny, however, that he who understands the theory of roots and calculation will
perceive this book with greater pleasure than one who is altogether ignorant of them; for the former can refer the
demonstrations to use, but the latter in no way. For this reason we in the first ten theorems of the second book
adapted numbers, so that he might take greater delight from that study than if it had not been so; not, however, so that
the understanding of other things might be more easily acquired from what is demonstrated there. “Why then,”
someone will say, “since in that book you did not likewise in this one employ numerical examples, such as we use in
Algebra—would that not have been both more pleasant and more convenient for readers?” The ready reason is why I
judged that to be omitted. For since very few at this time are familiar with the art of Algebra and have practiced it,
if such things were introduced they would rather darken than illuminate tender minds, and would give rise to more
suspicions; so that the minds of students, instead of receiving help and light (which we labor to bring by these
commentaries), would perceive more harshness than advantage in the demonstrations themselves. This in Book 4 we
could plainly do, since the addition of whole numbers and multiplication—by which alone our method there would
have proceeded—almost no one is sufficiently ignorant. To this is added that those who are practiced in Algebra can
easily adapt the demonstrations of this book to numbers by themselves whenever they wish. Besides, since this very
thing not long ago was diligently done and published by Michael Stifel, a noble arithmetician, in the second book of
his work which is entitled On Complete Arithmetic, etc.

But to return to our purpose: beginning the matter itself, Euclid, in his usual manner, starts from explanations of the
terms that will be used; and he declares first what magnitudes are called commensurable, defining them to be those
which the same measure measures. Thus two magnitudes A, B, which the same measure C measures (for C measures
A itself, repeated four times, etc., and three times, if need be, B itself) are called commensurable. In the same way
commensurable are a line of 20 palms and a line of 13 palms, because a line of one palm, or of half a palm, or of a
third part of one palm, etc., measures them. Similarly surfaces are said to be commensurable which are measured by
the same surface-measure; likewise bodies—solids are commensurable which are measured by the same body or solid.

A   B   C

I 2