❦ Euclid. Geometry. ❦                      ❦ Book X. ❦ 6
                     X.

But these incommensurable (areas), let them be called Irra-
tional.

  N O T otherwise are plane surfaces described by a square from a Rational line
called incommensurable, Irrational, than are li-
nes which are altogether incommensurable in Rational ratio,
called Irrational.

                     XI.

And straight lines, which themselves can (do so), (are) Irrationa-
l: if indeed those are squares, the sides themselves;
but if some other rectilinear (figures), the straight lines which
describe squares equal to incommensurable
areas.

  H E calls lines which can (produce) areas incommensurable with the square on a Ra-
tional line, Irrational; just as also the areas themselves are called Irrational: So that if incommensu-
rable squares indeed they shall be, their sides are called
Irrational; but if they shall not be squares, but other what-
ever rectilinear figures, they are called the straight lines which describe
squares equal to those incommensurable areas, Irra-
tional.

  I T  I S  C O L L E C T E D however, that lines which can (produce) areas incom-
mensurable with the square on a Rational line ought to be called Irra-
tional, from the 7th definition; just as above from the 6th definition we collec-
ted that lines which can (produce) areas commensurable with the same square on a
Rational line ought to be called Rational. For those
which can (produce) those incommensurable areas are in power
incommensurable with the Rational line, from the 4th definition. And since
all lines incommensurable in power are also incomm-
ensurable in length, as at definition 4 we said, and it will be shown
in the corollary of proposition 9, it is manifest from the 7th definition that the lines
which can (produce) areas incommensurable with the square on a Ra-
tional line are called Irrational.

I T  M U S T  A L S O  B E  P R E F A C E D that Euclid and
the ancient Geometers by this word: in length and in power, and
in power only, almost always add to those words: commen-
surable, and incommensurable: But scarcely, and very rarely,
to these: Rational, and Irrational: For rightly are lines said
commensurable in length and in power, or in power only;
Likewise incommensurable in length and in power, or in length
only: But less rightly (said) Rational in length and in po-
wer, or in power only, or Irrational in length and
in power, or in length only. Which indeed, since
Campanus did not notice, gave occasion to many, that
variously and obscurely in this 10th book concerning lines commensurable,
incommensurable, and also Rational, Irrational,
they might speak.

  M O R E O V E R to these definitions we shall add one postu-
late, and some propositions, whose use in this
book is found.

P O S T U L A T E,
or Petition.

LET IT BE POSTULATED, that any
magnitude can be multiplied so many times, un-
til it exceed any magnitude of the same
kind.

  F O R  it is a proposition that for two magnitudes of the
same kind unequal, since the greater is not infinite,
but the lesser can be increased infinitely; it is evident
that the lesser can be multiplied so many
times, until it surpass
the greater.

M XIO.