275

COMMENTARY
ON
THE TENTH  BOOK
OF THE
GEOMETRICAL
ELEMENTS
OF EUCLID.
DEFINITIONS.

I.

Commensurable magnitudes are said to be those
which the same measure measures.

If any magnitudes,
one common measure measures
equally or unequally,
adequately or inadequately;
those measured magnitudes
will be commensurable
with one another. As if
a line of one palm, a hundred times measures
some line A, and ten times another B, and four times with a
half another C; the three lines A,B,C, will be
commensurable; because one common
linear measure of one palm measures them. The same
must be said of many surfaces if some surface,
as a common figure, measures them.
By a similar reasoning bodies will be commensurable
if some body measures them with a common
measure.

II.

Incommensurable, however, are those for which it happens
that no common measure can be found.

If there are many lines, and no line can measure them
as a common measure; those lines will be incommensurable.
In like manner if there are many
surfaces, and no surface can measure them
as a common measure; those will be incommensurable
with one another. By a similar reasoning if there are many
bodies, and no body can measure them as a common
measure; those will be incommensurable
with one another.

III.

Straight lines are commensurable in power; when the
squares of them measure the same space.

Whenever the squares of many lines
some same space or some surface,
as a common measure, measure
equally or unequally, adequately or inadequately,
those lines are to be called
commensurable in power.
Note that we have deliberately, in the explanation of
this definition, by no means omitted mention of the
straight line, but of line in general: for many
are curved and circular, which if they are reduced
to a straight line, their squares will be commensurable;
although the lines themselves are not straight but
curved. Yet nevertheless, even so, their squares
cannot be commensurable unless they are
reduced to a straight line; for from a curved line as
curved, a square defined in the first book
cannot be made. wherefore with the best right Euclid
mentions only the straight line in this definition
of his; and we have inserted this remark.

IV.