204        EUCLID. GEOM.
              VI.
• And those commensurable with this either in length and power,
or in power only, [are] Rational.

He teaches that lines which are in any way commensurable with that
which is called Rational are also to be called Rational, not indeed by
position, as that [one], but because, when compared with it, they are
found commensurable with it either in length and power, or in power
only.
And so, from Euclid’s meaning, the square root of this number 20, or
1000, &c. Or what is the same, the straight line whose square is 20, or
1000, &c. is called Rational; since in power it is commensurable with a
Rational line; (for the number 20, as well as 1000, is commensurable
with any square number, as 16, 100, &c.) although in length it is
incommensurable with the same. Therefore not a few arithmeticians are
said [to be those] who call it Irrational, because it cannot be expressed
by number.

              VII.
But those incommensurable with this, let them be called
Irrational.

Since by the preceding definition Euclid called those lines which in
length and power, or which in power only, are commensurable with the
proposed Rational straight line, Rational; it is clearly established that
here he calls those Irrational which are incommensurable with the
proposed Rational straight line in both ways, namely in length and
power, but not in length only. From which it is also manifest that the
square root of this number 20, or 1000, &c. or (what is the same) the
line whose square is 20, or 1000, &c. cannot be called Irrational,
since it is not incommensurable in length and power, but in length only,
with the proposed Rational line.

              VIII.
And the square which is made from the proposed straight line,
let it be called Rational.

Just as that line which is set down as certain and known is called
Rational: so also the square described from it is called Rational,
because it too is certain and known, and by comparison with it other
surfaces are said to be commensurable or incommensurable.

              IX.
And those commensurable with this indeed [are] Rational.
All plane surfaces commensurable with the square on the proposed
Rational line are called Rational; not indeed by position, as that [one],
but because, when compared with it, they are found to be either
commensurable,
or