280  ❦❦  EUCLID. GEOM.  ❦❦

can be said of the very same things and of solids, since in these
incommensurables they very often occur, as we shall demonstrate
at the end of this book. But since this book is obscure to many
because of difficulties, because of the obscurity of the lines about
which it speaks; I shall strain every nerve of my diligence in it,
so that from those things which up to now have been demonstrated
by Euclid, it may be made so plain and
easy, that without much labor it can be understood by anyone
who has correctly understood the demonstrations of the preceding
books. For I cannot go along with the opinion of those
who think that for its understanding that part of Arithmetic is
necessary which sets forth discourse about the roots of numbers,
both rational and irrational, as they call them: indeed, on the
contrary I am thoroughly persuaded that a perfect knowledge
of that part of Arithmetic depends on this 10th book; so far
is it from my thinking that that treatment of roots is required
in order that this book be understood easily. I do not deny, however,
that he who knows the theory of roots and calculation will
perceive this book with greater pleasure than one who is wholly
ignorant of them, because the former can apply the demonstrations
to use, but the latter in no way. For for this reason
we too adapted the first ten theorems of the second book to numbers,
so that the student might take from it a greater delight of mind
and profit; not, however, because we thought that those things
which are demonstrated in that book could be understood more easily from numbers. Why
therefore (someone will say) as in that book, did you not likewise in this
one employ examples of numbers which Algebra uses, so that
the matter might be both more pleasant, and more convenient for readers? The
reason is at hand why we thought that should be omitted. For
since very few at this time are those to whom that most celebrated
art of Algebra is known, those numbers, if they were employed,
would seem rather to cast darkness than to give some greater light,
and clarity; since thus the minds of students, according to what they are accustomed to,
and the light which we strive to bring by these our commentaries,
would take on more inconvenience, and would perceive the demonstrations themselves less:
which could not happen in book 2, since addition
of whole numbers and multiplication, which alone were necessary there,
there is hardly anyone who does not know. To this is added, that
those who are practiced in Algebra can easily adapt the demonstrations
of this book to numbers by themselves, whenever
they wish