EUCLID. GEOM.

their squares are incommensurable. Therefore those lines which are incommensurable in length, whose squares are commensurable, are here by Euclid called commensurable in power;
because namely according to their powers, that is according to their squares (for, as we said at prop. 47 of book I, the power of any line is the square described on it) they are commensurable, although they themselves according to length are altogether incommensurable.

BUT if anyone should ask why Euclid defined separately lines commensurable in power, and not commensurable in length; it must be answered that lines commensurable in length are (enough and more) explained in the definition of commensurable magnitudes, since one common measure measures lines of this kind, as has been said. But because lines commensurable in power cannot be measured by any common measure, but only their squares measure the same space, therefore it was altogether necessary that they be explained by a proper definition.

III.

INCOMMENSURABLES, how-
ever, when with their squares no space,
which is a common measure of them, hap-
pens to be found.

THE remaining lines incommensurable in length, whose squares also are incommensurable, he calls incommensurable in power.
BUT lines commensurable both in length and in power have, as it were, this agreement among themselves and connection, that lines commensurable in length are also commensurable in power, so that no lines can be given commensurable in length, whose squares are not also commensurable: because the square described from their common measure measures their squares as a common measure, as in the figure set below ap-
pears:

I
H
G
F C
D A B


BOOK X. 4

appears: for just as the straight line A B measures the straight lines C D, E, F, so also the square A G measures the squares C H, E I: But not that all lines commensurable in power are also commensurable in length; for many lines are commensurable in power, that is, have commensurable squares, which nevertheless in length are altogether incommensurable, as will be demonstrated in this book. Again among lines incommensurable both in length and in power, such a connection is found, that all lines incommensurable in power are also incommensurable in length; but not conversely, that all lines incommensurable in length are also incommensurable in power, since many lines are found incommensurable with one another in length, while nevertheless in power, that is, according to their squares, they are commensurable. Which indeed all will be clear from the corollary of proposition 9 of this book.

V.

THESE being set down, it is shown that to any proposed straight
line there are infinitely many straight lines both commensurable and in-
commensurable: some indeed in length and in power; but others in power
only. Let the proposed straight line be called
Rational.

IF some straight line of known magnitude be proposed, the squares of all other lines which are compared with it will be commensurable with it, in length and in power, but some in power only: likewise some incommensurable with it in length only; and some in length and in power, as will be demonstrated in various places in this tenth book. For Euclid does not in the last place show from what has been said, or gather (although his words seem to sound so) that these things are so; but only indicates to us, as if to hint in some way, that some lines can be called commensurable in length with the proposed straight line.
A 4