254            THE TENTH ELEMENT            Book 10.

5  These things being so, it is shown, (that is to say, manifest,)
   that to every right line proposed, an infinite number of right
   lines are commensurable, and an infinite number are incom-
   mensurable, some in length and power, others only in power;
   Now let that right line proposed, be called rational.

IF there be proposed some right line, of a known and determinate Mag-
nitude, of all the lines compared with it, some shall be commensurable
in length and power thereto, others in power only, also some shall be in-
commensurable in length thereto, and some in length and power, as shall be
shown in this Book : But this line proposed, by reason of which, the others
are said to be commensurable, or incommensurable, is named by the Greeks
rhētē, that is to say, rational, for that it is always proposed of a known
Magnitude, and that according thereto are judged : But the others compa-
red therewith, are not always known : although according to the same
lines taken apart, they may be known, each of them being divided into
such equal parts as you please.

6  And the right lines commensurable to this rational line, either
   in length and power, or in power alone, may be also called
   rationals.

Euclid shows that the other lines commensurable, after what manner so-
ever, to the line called rational, are also rationals, not by supposition, as
the line itself : but as being compared therewith, they will be found com-
mensurable thereto in length and power, or in power only.

7  And the lines incommensurable to this rational line, may be
   called irrationals.

SEEING that in the preceding Definition Euclid hath called the lines com-
mensurable in length and power, or in power only to the rational line
proposed, Rationals, it is manifest by that Definition, that those lines which
are incommensurable to the Rational proposed in length and power, and not
in length only, are Irrationals.

8  And the square described of the rational line proposed, may
   be called rational.

EVEN as the line proposed to be known and determinate, is said to be ra-
tional : even so the square described thereof, is called rational, forasmuch
as that also is known and certain, and in comparison thereof, the other Sur-
faces are said to be commensurables, or incommensurables.

9  And


Book 10.            OF EUCLID.            255

9  And the figures commensurable to this square rational, may
   be called rationals.

ALL the Plane Surfaces commensurable to the square of the rational
line proposed, are said to be rationals, yet not by supposition as the same,
being compared to the same square, they are found to be commensurable
thereto, or incommensurable, even so also as the lines in what manner
soever commensurable to the line proposed rational, are called rationals.

10  But the figures incommensurable to the rational square, may
    be called irrationals, or Surds.

EVEN so as the lines incommensurable to the line proposed rational, are said
to be irrational, so also the plane Surfaces incommensurable to the
square of the rational line, are called irrationals.

11  And the right lines which are in power as the same irratio-
    nal figures, are said to be irrationals, and Surds ; to wit, if
    they be squares, their sides may be irrational ; but if they be
    other rectilines whatsoever, the lines which are in power, as
    the squares equal to those irrational figures may be irra-
    tional.

HE calls the lines which are equal in power to the spaces incommensura-
ble to the square of the rational line, irrationals in such sort, that if
those spaces irrational are squares, their sides shall be said to be irratio-
nal, if they be not squares, but are other rectilines; the right lines which
describe the squares, equal to those spaces incommensurable, shall be said
to be irrational : for a right line is said to be equal in power to a figure, when
the square described of the same line is equal to the same figure.

                PETITIONS

That any Magnitude whatsoever, may be multiplied so many
times, as that it may exceed any Magnitude whatsoever
proposed of the same kind.

FOR two Magnitudes unequal, but of the same kind being proposed, the
greatest being not infinite, and the least in power to be augmented
infinitely, it is manifest, that the least may be multiplied so many times, as
that it may exceed the greatest, which appears also by the fifth definition
of the fifth Book.

COM-