254            THE TENTH ELEMENT            Lib. 10.

5  Theſe things being ſo, it is ſhewn, (that is to ſay, manifeſt,)
   that to every right line propoſed, an infinite number of right
   lines are commenſurable, and an infinite number are incom-
   menſurable, ſome in length and power, others only in power;
   Now let that right line propoſed, be called rational.

IF there be propoſed ſome right line, of a known and determinate Mag-
nitude, of all the lines compared with it, ſome ſhall be commenſurable
in length and power thereto, others in power only, alſo ſome ſhall be in-
commenſurable in length thereto, and ſome in length and power, as ſhall be
ſhewn in this Book : But this line propoſed, by reaſon of which, the others
are ſaid to be commenſurable, or incommenſurable, is named by the Greeks
ῥητὴ, that is to ſay, rational, for that it is always propoſed of a known
Magnitude, and that according thereto are judged : But the others compa-
red therewith, are not always known : although according to the ſame
lines taken apart, they may be known, each of them being divided into
ſuch equal parts as you pleaſe.

6  And the right lines commenſurable to this rational line, either
   in length and power, or in power alone, may be alſo called
   rationals.

Euclide ſhews that the other lines commenſurable, after what manner ſo-
ever, to the line called rational, are alſo rationals, not by ſuppoſition, as
the line it ſelfe : but as being compared therewith, they will be found com-
menſurable thereto in length and power, or in power only.

7  And the lines incommenſurable to this rational line, may be
   called irrationals.

SEeing that in the precedent Definition Euclide hath called the lines com-
menſurable in length and power, or in power only to the rational line
propoſed, Rationals, it is manifeſt by that Definition, that thoſe lines which
are incommenſurable to the Rational propoſed in length and power, and not
in length only, are Irrationals.

8  And the ſquare deſcribed of the rational line propoſed, may
   be called rational.

EVen as the line propoſed to be known and determinate, is ſaid to be ra-
tional : even ſo the ſquare deſcribed thereof, is called rational, forafmuch
as that alſo is known and certaine, and in compariſon thereof, the other Su-
perficies are ſaid to be commenſurables, or incommenſurables.

9  And


Lib. 10.            OF EUCLIDE.            255

9  And the figures commenſurable to this ſquare rational, may
   be called rationals.

ALL the Plain Superficies commenſurable to the ſquare of the rational
line propoſed, are ſaid to be rationals, yet not by ſuppoſition as the ſame,
being compared to the ſame ſquare, they are found to be commenſurable
thereto, or incommenſurable, even ſo alſo as the lines in what manner
ſoever commenſurable to the line propoſed rational, are called rationals.

10  But the figures incommenſurable to the rational ſquare, may
    be called irrationals, or Surds.

EVen ſo as the lines incommenſurable to the line propoſed rational, are ſaid
to be irrational, ſo alſo the plain Superficies incommenſurable to the
ſquare of the rational line, are called irrationals.

11  And the right lines which are in power as the ſame irratio-
    nal figures, are ſaid to be irrationals, and Surds ; to wit, if
    they be ſquares, their ſides may be irrational ; but if they be
    other rectilines whatſoever, the lines which are in power, as
    the ſquares equal to thoſe irrational figures may be irra-
    tional.

HE calls the lines which are equal in power to the ſpaces incommenſura-
ble to the ſquare of the rational line, irrationals in ſuch ſort, that if
thoſe ſpaces irrational are ſquares, their ſides ſhall be ſaid to be irratio-
nal, if they be not ſquares, but are other rectilines; the right lines which
deſcribe the ſquares, equal to thoſe ſpaces incommenſurable, ſhall be ſaid
to be irrational : for a right line is ſaid to be equal in power to a figure, when
the ſquare deſcribed of the ſame line is equal to the ſame figure.

                PETITIONS

That any Magnitude whatſoever, may be multiplied ſo many
times, as that it may exceed any Magnitude whatſoever
propoſed of the ſame kind.

FOr two Magnitudes unequal, but of the ſame kind being propoſed, the
greateſt being not infinite, and the leaſt in power to be augmented
infinitely, it is manifeſt, that the leaſt may be multiplied ſo many times, as
that it may exceed the greateſt, which appeares alſo by the fifth definition
of the fifth Book.

COM-