TENTH                                           Fol.  133

that, given two unequal quantities, one can always multiply the smaller
so that such multiplication exceeds the greater quantity.

Theorem 1.  Proposition 1.

If from two proposed unequal quantities, from the greater there be taken
away more than the half, and from the remainder again there be taken away
more than the half, and then continuing in the same way, finally
it is necessary that there remain a quantity smaller than the proposed
smaller.

[uncertain: and so it is done from hand to hand.]

Let the two unequal quantities be a and b.c, and let b.c be the greater. I say that so
many times more than the half of b.c can be taken away (or of the remainder
of it) as will be necessary for there to remain a quantity smaller than a. And in order to
show this, let a be multiplied so many times that by such a number it exceeds b.c, and let
d.e.f be the multiple of it, greater than b.c; therefore from b.c there will be taken away
more than the half, which will be b.g, and also from the remainder (which is e.g) there will
be taken away more than the half, which will be g.h, and this again will be done so many times
until b.c is divided into as many parts as the number of times that a is contained in
d.e.f. Now I say that the last remainder (which in this place is e.h.c) is smaller than a.
And to make this clear, let h.c be multiplied by as much as a is contained
in d.e.f, and let the multiple of it be K.l.m, because then each of the parts
of the true quantity K.l.m is equal to l.h.c; it follows that K is less than b.g, and
l.m less than g.h. But because m is equal to l.h.c (by the convention) K.l.m will be
less than b.c, by which it will also be less than d.e.f; and it is conditioned then
that d.e.f is to a as K.l.m to h.c; and since d.e.f is greater than K.l.m, it follows
(by the fourteenth proposition of the fifth book) that a is greater
than h.c, which is the proposition. And the same follows if from the greater there be taken away
the half, and also from the remainder the half, and thus to proceed so many times until
the greater is divided into as many parts as the number of times the smaller is contained in
any of its multiples exceeding, by as much as one wishes, the greater of
the proposed. But it must be noted that in this one sees it to contradict the sixteenth
proposition of the third book, which proposes the angle of contingency
to be less than any proposed angle contained by two straight lines; for
given any angle obtained from straight lines, from it we shall take away
more than the half, and likewise from the remainder we shall take away more than the half, and one sees it
to be necessary that this can be done so many times that there remain a rectilinear angle
smaller than the angle of contingency; of which thing the sixteenth proposition
of the third book concludes the opposite; but these angles are not univocal
because the curved and the straight are not similarly of one and the same genus. Nor
can one know that the angle of contingency has been taken away so many times that it
exceeds any rectilinear angle whatsoever, which thing is necessary as is made
manifest by the demonstration had above; therefore to this it is also
clear (since the consequent is followed from the antecedent) that any
rectilinear angle is greater than infinite angles of contingency.

The translator.

To wish to demonstrate by another shorter way that the remainder h.c is
smaller than the quantity a (so many that the multiple d.e.f is greater than the
quantity b.c, which is of b.c more than the half in which is b.g) and of the, subtr-