BOOK TEN.                                                                    1031

commensurable in length only; but some in length and in power, as will be demonstrated in this book
in various places. For Euclid does not wish it to be shown from what has been said that there are none;
(although his words may seem to sound this) that it is so: but he only indicates to us that, if all lines in some
way are demonstrated, some can be said to be, with respect to the proposed straight line, commensurable
in length and in power, and some in power only, etc. Which indeed follows from the distinction just made,
but he will demonstrate it in what follows, as we have said.

But those proposed lines, by a certain reasoning, as others, are either commensurable or incommensurable,
are called by the Greeks ῥηταὶ; but by the Latins Rationales; because that one is always set down as certain
and known, but the others, compared with it, are not always made known, although each singly constitutes
something simply existing, certain also and known: since each in a ratio can be divided into equal parts.

VI.

And those commensurable with it either in length and power, or in power only,
[are called] Rational.

He teaches that other lines, commensurable with that which is called Rational in whatever way, are also
called Rational; not indeed by position, as that one, but because, compared with it, they are found commensurable
with it either in length and power, or in power only.

Thus, according to the meaning of Euclid, the square root of this number 20, or 1000, etc. Or what is the same,
the straight line whose square is 20, or 1000, etc., is called Rational; since in power it is commensurable with the
Rational, (for 14 is a number [for] 20 because of the aim: commensurable with any square number, as 16 or 100, etc.)
although in length it is incommensurable with it. Therefore not a few arithmeticians are deceived, who for that reason
call it Irrational, because it cannot be expressed by a number.

VII.

But those incommensurable with it are called Irrational.

Since in the preceding definition Euclid called those lines Rational which are commensurable in length and power,
or which are commensurable in power only, with the proposed straight line Rational, it is clear that here he calls
Irrational those which are incommensurable with the proposed straight line Rational in both ways; namely in length
and in power: but not in length only. From which it is also clear that the square root of this number 20, or 1000, etc.,
or (what is the same) the line whose square is 20, or 1000, etc., cannot be called Irrational, since it is not incommensurable
with the proposed Rational line in length and power, but in length only.

VIII.

And the square which is described on the proposed straight line is called Rational.

Just as that line which is set down as certain and known is called Rational: so also the square described on it is called
Rational, because it itself is certain and known, in comparison with which other surfaces are said to be commensurable
or incommensurable.

IX.

And those commensurable with it indeed [are called] Rational.

All plane surfaces commensurable with the square of the proposed Rational line are called Rational; not indeed by position,
as that one, but because, compared with it, they are found either commensurable with it or incommensurable: just as also
lines which are commensurable in whatever way with the Rational line are called Rational.

But since the lines called powers are themselves areas commensurable with the square of the proposed Rational line, at least
commensurable in power with the Rational line, from the 3rd definition; it is clear that they too are to be called Rational by
definition 6.

X.

But those incommensurable with it are called Irrational.

In no other way are plane surfaces incommensurable with the square described on the Rational line called Irrational, than as
lines which are altogether incommensurable with the proposed Rational are called Irrational.

XI.

And the straight lines which can [produce] them are Irrational: if indeed those [areas] are squares, the sides themselves;
but if some other rectilinear [figures], the straight lines which describe squares equal to
the incommensurable areas.

He teaches that lines which can [produce] areas incommensurable with the square of the Rational line are Irrational; just as he
also called the areas themselves Irrational. Thus where the incommensurable areas are indeed squares, their sides are called
Irrational; but if they are not squares, but any other rectilinear figure, the straight lines which describe squares equal to those
incommensurable areas are Irrational.

I 3