TENTH.                                   Fol. 132

or if you measure the square surfaces of the said proposed lines, such lines will be
called incommensurable in power. Which things being as has been set forth,
it is already manifest that to every proposed straight line (that is, to that with which we take
the measures of cubits, palms, and fingers, or feet) there are infinite multitudes of
straight lines commensurable and incommensurable with it, some in length
and in power, and others only in power.

Definition. 4.

4 But every proposed straight line with which we reason, shall be called
4 rational.

The Translator.

IN this definition the author advises us that that material measure
which we shall use in our commensurations (whether a rod, or
a pace, or a foot, or an arm, or some other measure formed at our pleasure) will
be called rational, because it is a quantity known and familiar to us.

Definition. 5.

5 And the lines communicating with it are called rational.
4

The Translator.

ALTHOUGH this definition is set distinct from the preceding, it must
be understood joined with it successively: because in this
it is stated jointly that all those lines which shall be commensurable
with that proposed line (that is, with that measure with which we shall measure, whether a rod,
or a pace, or a foot, or an arm, or some other measure formed at our pleasure) are
called rational; for example let us suppose that our proposed line (with which
we measure, or it is intended to occur to measure our things) is that
material measure which is called a pace, divided into five feet, and each foot
according to modern custom, into twelve inches; now I say that not only the said
pace will be a rational line (by the preceding definition) but also all the
lines measured with the said pace, and with its parts, will be called rational: by
the present definition, because all the said lines will come to be commensurable
with our proposed rational, that is, with our pace. And so that you may
understand me better, let us suppose there is a line, or length, long six paces
four feet seven and a half inches; I say the said line, or length, to be
a rational quantity (by the preceding definition) because it is commensurable with
our pace (by the first definition) and their common measure will come to be
the half inch, that is, that a line long half an inch will measure the proposed
length precisely 831 times, and will also measure our pace precisely
120 times; whence by the said first definition they will be commensurable,
and by the preceding and present definition, the one and the other will be rational, which
is the proposed.

☞ But it must be noted that this same definition in the second translation
speaks in this other form.

5 And those lines which with this shall be commensurable in length
4 and in power, and also only in power, are called rational
R  iiii