BOOK  TENTH.                                                                  98

they comprehend, comprehended under two commensurable sides, which indeed, counting the units of the rectangle as a whole, will be. But since the length and breadth of any unit are certain lines, since they are certain commensurable [lines]. It produces a certain rectangle, whose length and breadth are determined, just as it [is]. But if to it there be compared another certain [line] proposed, commensurable with it in power only, but in length by no means. Therefore, as it is that the units of those lines are incommensurable, from the hypothesis. Wherefore the rectangle comprehended under the unit of a certain line and the unit of the other incommensurable with the former, is uncertain and indeterminate. For one of its dimensions is certain, the other, being uncertain, makes it indeterminate. Therefore a rectangle consisting of these indeterminate units will be uncertain and indeterminate, that is, by nature something from what is proposed. But if to the same proposed [line] there be offered two [lines] commensurable in power only (but mutually incommensurable in length) which comprehend a rectangle, it is written that the units of that rectangle are contained under lines incommensurable with the same certain [line], both according to length and breadth. And nevertheless [they are] certain: for under lines commensurable to it in length and in power (if it is contained under lines commensurable to the proposed certain [line]. But because their power is commensurable with the proposed certain [line], it will follow that the rectangle comprehended under them, and composed from these units, is commensurable with the square of that certain [line] (and therefore certain). Indeed the rectangle consisting of the same square units will become commensurable with the same power with which the squares were commensurable.

                              Proposition one.

With two unequal magnitudes set out, if from the greater there be taken
more than the half, and from what remains more than the half,
and this be done often, there will at last be left a magnitude smaller than a
given smaller magnitude.

Let two magnitudes A and G D be set out: from the greater A
let there be taken from G more than the half (namely
D Z, and again from the remainder G Z more than the half
namely Z I, and so let it be done often: I say that at last there can be left a magnitude G I smaller than the given smaller magnitude
A K. Let there be added to A K so many equals as at some time exceed G, by the 4th def. of the
fifth, let them be K N, and T B. As many times as A B has been cut at T and K, so many times let G D be cut, with more than the half often taken
at Z and I; but since A B is greater than G D, yet from A B there is taken T B not more than the half, but from the remainder
of G D there is taken Z D more than the half, the remainder G Z will therefore be less than the remainder A T. By the same argument again,
since from the greater A T there will be taken K T not more than the half, but from the smaller G Z there will be taken, from the hypothesis,
Z I more than the half, it will follow that the remainder G I is less than the remainder A K, that is, less than the given smaller magnitude.
Therefore, with two magnitudes set out, &c.        Otherwise, where only the half is taken from the greater
often, let A K be doubled until it
exceed the greater G D in T and B; let
G D be bisected in I and Z, which are I and Z: since as the whole A B is to the half A T so is A T to A K, so
are G D to G Z and G Z to G I (namely in doubling) Therefore by equal ratio as A B is to A K, so will be
G D to G I (by 22 of the fifth) but A B is greater than G D (by hypothesis) therefore A K will be greater than
G I (by 14 of the fifth) and hence G I, with the half often taken away, is less than A K.

                                 NOTE.

There were not lacking those who wished to restrict the immense power of this theorem to quantities,
by an opposing argument from the sixteenth of the third, among whom the chief was Campanus, when he says that the angle of
contingency is always left smaller than any rectilinear angle. From which, if more than the half
has been taken away, therefore this theorem seems to be supported by a trifling exception. But he resolves this
argument, saying that these angles are not univocally called angles, and that the curved and the straight are different
kinds, which we by no means can admit. For rectilinear angles and angles of contingency are the same
as to quantity, although as to commensuration they are different; for the quantity of angles
is contained in the sole inclination of lines, as whatever inclination has been greater, smaller, or equal, the quanti-