312

' The B E G I N N I N G S of
Likewise some are incommensurable in length only, and some in length and power.
For from what has been said it is not shown (although the words seem well
to sound these things) to have them truly so; but they give us in some
measure to understand some of these lines to be said to be commensurable
with the proposed straight line in length and power, some in power only,
some also incommensurable with the same proposed straight line in length and
power, and some in length only. Which although it does not follow from what
has been said, so it appears the same from the following proofs. But that
proposed straight line is called a Rational one, since the same is always set
certain and known, but the others, which are compared with this [rational],
are not always known, although each of them taken by itself also certainly
and known exists, and into some equal parts as occasion may be can be cut.

The sixth Definition.
And those which are commensurable with this [ proposed straight line ], either in length
and power, or in power only, are rational.

H Here it is shown that all other straight lines, which are commensurable, either in length
and power, or in power only, with a rational straight line, are also to be called
Rational, not in root, like that straight one, but in relation with the same. Thus also
the square root of the number 20 or 1000 etc., or, which is the same, the straight line
whose square is 20 or 1000 etc., is said to be rational, since it is commensurable in
power with a rational line: [ for the number as well 20 as 10000 is commensurable with
the square number 20 16 as 100 ] although in length it is incommensurable with the
proposed rational one. Therefore also not a few Reckoners c are deceived, who think
the straight line, which cannot be expressed with any number, to be called an Irrational.
e. Arithme-
ticians.

The seventh Definition.
But those which are incommensurable with this [ proposed straight line ] are Ir-
rational. *
* I. rationa-
les.

S Since all straight lines which are commensurable with a proposed rational one, either in
length and power, or in power only, are called Rational, it follows that the straight line
which with the proposed rational is neither commensurable in length and power, nor in
power only, but wholly incommensurable, as well in power as length, is to be called
Irrational.

The eighth Definition.
And the square, which comes from the proposed straight line, is called a Ra-
tional one.

Like