BOOK X.                                                                  205

or incommensurable: just as also lines which are in any way commensurable
with a Rational line are called Rational.

BUT since lines which are capable (in power) of the spaces commensurable
with the square on the proposed Rational line are at least commensurable in
power with the Rational line, from definition 3 it is clear that these too are
called, according to definition 6, Rational.

X.
But these incommensurable [ones] are called
Irrational.
In no other way are plane surfaces incommensurable with the square
described on a Rational line called Irrational, and likewise lines which are
altogether incommensurable with a proposed Rational [line] are called
Irrational.

XI.
And straight lines which are capable of the squares themselves are
Irrational: if indeed those squares are [on] the sides themselves; but if
they are some other rectilinear [figures], [then] the straight lines which
describe squares equal to incommensurable spaces.
He calls lines which are capable of spaces incommensurable with the square
on a Rational line Irrational, just as he also calls the spaces themselves
Irrational: so that, if the incommensurable spaces are indeed squares, their
sides are called Irrational; but if they are not squares, but any other rectilinear
figure, the straight lines which describe squares equal to those incommensurable
spaces are called Irrational.
It is gathered, moreover, that lines capable of spaces incommensurable with
the square on a Rational line ought to be called Irrational, from definition 7,
just as above from definition 6 we gathered that lines which are capable of
spaces commensurable with the same square on a Rational line ought to be
called Rational. For the lines which are capable of those incommensurable
spaces are incommensurable in power with the Rational line, from definition 4.
Therefore since all lines incommensurable in power are also incommensurable
in length, as we said at definition 4, and it will be demonstrated in the corollary
of proposition 9, it is clear from definition 7 that those lines which are capable
of spaces incommensurable with the square on a Rational line are called
Irrational.
Nor is it to be passed over that Euclid and the ancient geometers almost always
add these words—“in length” and “in power,” and “in power only”—to the
words themselves “commensurable” and “incommensurable”; but scarcely and
very rarely [do they add them] to these: “Rational” and “Irrational.” For
straight lines are called lines commensurable in length