276

Commentary on the Tenth Book

IV.
But they are incommensurable in square, when
no area, which may be a common measure of them,
can be found.

Since he speaks of straight lines in the preceding
definition, in this one also he speaks; for the particle
“but” is referred to the straight lines of the former
definition, commensurable in power; but the difference
is that in this definition he treats of straight lines
incommensurable in length. Therefore if the squares
of many lines are incommensurable, that is, if no area
is a common measure of them, the straight lines
themselves are incommensurable in length.
For a perfect understanding of these four definitions,
and of those that follow, it must be noted first:
that a measure in general ought to be of the same
kind as the thing measured or to be measured,
according to definition 5 of book 5; for measure and
measured (or to-be-measured) are comparable.
Wherefore the measure of lines ought to be a line,
not a surface or a body; and the measure of surfaces
ought to be a surface, not a line or a body; and the
measure of bodies ought to be a body, not a line or a
surface; because however much a line be multiplied,
it will never exceed a surface or a body. Secondly it
must be noted that the measure of quantities ought to
be suited to the things measured, and more universal;
wherefore, to measure squares, a square is assumed,
which, since it is similar to the squares to be measured,
is taken as their common measure; although any other
plane area equal to it can be applied, but not so
conveniently. From which it follows that the area
which ought to be the common measure is more
properly understood to be a square. Thirdly it must be
noted that some straight lines are commensurable with
one another in length; others indeed incommensurable
in length; others commensurable in power only. And
it will be established from the corollary of proposition 9
of this book that straight lines commensurable in length
are also commensurable in power; but straight lines
commensurable in power are not always commensurable
in length, for some are also commensurable in length,
others incommensurable in length. Moreover he will
show in the same corollary that straight lines
incommensurable in length are not always
incommensurable in power; for some are
incommensurable in length and not in power; others
in length and power together; and others are
incommensurable in power, and these are always also
incommensurable in length. Lastly it must be noted
that a straight line which is actually the side of a square,
or an area which can be made a square by proposition 46
of book 1, or whose square is equal to some rectangle
or to some other plane figure, is called by geometers,
following Euclid’s example in this book in many
propositions, a “powerful” straight line, understanding
some square, or a figure equal to a square, as given:
whence it comes about that the power of a straight line
is the square made from it, or the square described upon it.

V.
These things being set down, it is shown of what sort the straight
lines are, similar in multitude and commensurable
and incommensurable to a proposed straight line,
some indeed in length and power, others in power only.
Let the proposed straight line be called Rational.

He defines in this place the straight line which is
called Rational; so that, the preceding definitions being
set down, there is some proposed line, which geometers
call the “exposed” line while demonstrating. With
respect to it many other straight lines are commensurable,
and others incommensurable, so that with respect to
that Rational some are commensurable in length and
power, some indeed in power only; but some of these
with respect to this Rational are incommensurable in
length only; and some incommensurable in length and
power. Note that we always write the name Rational,
indicating this line, with a capital R prefixed, to avoid
equivocation with the other name “rational” or
“conformed to reason.”

VI.
And these commensurable either in length and power,
or in power only; (are) Rational.

That is: all straight lines commensurable to some
exposed or proposed Rational straight line, either in
length and power, or in power only, are to be called
Rational.

VII.
But here the incommensurable, let them be called
Irrational.

This definition ought to be understood thus, that
just as in the preceding, the sixth
he defined