100

EUCLID’S ELEMENTS
II.

INCOMMENSURABLES, however, are those for which it happens that no common measure
can be found.

SUCH magnitudes are the diameter of any square, and the side of the same; which
have no common [measure], as will be demonstrated by Euclid in this book, as we use proportion.
For there are incommensurable lines, for which indeed no common measure can be given, of which many
the geometer explains in this book. Thus also the squares of incommensurable
lines, and incommensurable solids, which admit no common measure.

II.

STRAIGHT lines are commensurable in power, when their squares are measured by the same
area.

OF straight lines, some are commensurable in length, which namely some other line, as a
common measure, measures; of which sort are those which in the exposition of def. 1 we called simply
commensurable: but some are incommensurable in length, which indeed no line, as a common
measure, measures. Again, of lines which are incommensurable in length, some are such that their squares
are commensurable; but others are so disposed that their squares also are incommensurable. Therefore those
lines incommensurable in length, whose squares are commensurable, are by Euclid called by a special name
commensurable in power; because namely according to their powers, that is, according to their squares
(for, as we said at prop. 7 of book I, the power of each line is the square described on it) they are
commensurable, although the lines themselves (which are in length) are altogether incommensurable.

BUT if someone should ask why Euclid defined that lines are commensurable in power, and not
commensurable in length, it must be answered that lines commensurable in length have been sufficiently
explained above in the definition of commensurable magnitudes, since such lines are measured by one and a common
measure, as has been said. But since lines commensurable in power cannot be measured by any common measure,
but only their squares are measured by the same area, therefore it was altogether necessary that they be explained
by their own proper definition.

III.

INCOMMENSURABLES, however, [are those] when for their squares no area
which is a common measure of them can be found.

THE remaining lines incommensurable in length, whose squares also are incommensurable,
he calls incommensurable in power.

BUT lines commensurable both in length and in power have this commensuration
and connection among themselves, that lines commensurable in length are also commensurable in power; so that many
lines can be given commensurable in length, without their squares also being commensurable; since
a square described from their commensuration measures their squares as a common measure
measures their squares; whence this form appears: the intermediate A B measures the remaining
C D, E F, and likewise the square A G measures the squares
C H, E I: Therefore it is not [the case] that many lines
commensurable in power are also commensurable
in length; for many lines
are commensurable in power, that is,
have commensurable squares, whose nevertheless
lengths are altogether incommensurable,
as will be demonstrated in this book. Again, among lines incommensurable both in length and in power, this
notable connection is found, that all lines incommensurable in power are also incommensurable in
length; but not conversely, that all lines incommensurable in length are also necessarily
incommensurable in power, since many lines are found incommensurable in length with one another, while nevertheless in power, that
is, according to their squares, they are commensurable. Which indeed all will be made clear from the corollary
of proposition 9 of this book.

V.

THESE things having been set down, it is shown that, for any proposed straight line, there are straight lines in a multitude
infinite both commensurable and incommensurable: some indeed in length and
power; but others in power only. Let the proposed straight line be called rational.

IF some straight line of known magnitude be proposed, there will be altogether others, which when compared with it are
some commensurable with it in length and power, but others in power only; likewise some to it in-
[uncertain: bominifc-]