BOOK

successive proportionals: let it be shown then from h equals, that is, m.h. and the remainder h.n.
which will be thus equals. likewise from f.g. let it be shown from f.g. thus equals that f.n. will be and the premised n
so that the aggregate from e. and h. and k. and l. is 13 and f.n. to which it is equal. and that the aggregate
from a. and b. and c. and d. and unit; likewise as many f.g. as the aggregate from all these
a.b.c.d. and unit and those e.h.k.l. from which it is manifest that the number is that
square f.g.c. indeed let it be h. and b. and g.n.k.cd from the first part. 20. seven. fifth used and
proportionality wherever it shall be needed. for let it be as d.a. to d.c. so h. to e. and u. to a.d.b.
likewise k. to e.p. by equal proportionality and from c.i.h. and from b.i.k. it is necessary
to come. therefore f.g. which had led two, d.i.e.l. therefore no other than these numbers f.g. itself
by division a perfect number. Which that it is no other number thus first if indeed
this is possible, that it may number the same, q. and it will be by 33. seven. that it is numbered e. another numbered
of them let it be that it numbers p. and that it numbers by the second part. 20. seven. that e. to d. so u.e. to p. is read
so that q. numbers d. as much as eu.a.q. likewise unit is premised. that binary will be q.p.
thus of this either a. or b. or c. or whatever else this shall have been will be p.a.ul.l. or k. or h. if
for if q. shall have been a. how much q.p. will be l. which is premised by 1. if it shall have been b. p will be c. and if it shall have been b
therefore p is not diverse from those as a number can be set. therefore q.f.g. is a perfect number which was to be demonstrated.    Here ends Book Nine; Book Ten begins.

Quantities which have one common quantity, those
numbers they call commensurate; but which do not have
one common quantity, those numbers they call incommensurable.
Lines commensurate in power are said
when the square surfaces are one common
numbered surface. Lines incommensurable in power
are said when the square surfaces are not numbered
one common surface: which that it is thus is manifest
because of all lines commonly many others are incommensurable,
some in length, some in length and power.
Every line which can be expressed by reckoning is called rational. Lines
which communicate with it are called rational; but those not communicating
are called irrational or deaf. Every square surface of which by
hypothesis we can reckon is called rational. Surfaces which communicate
with it are called rational. But those incommensurable with it, surfaces
are called irrational or deaf. But the sides which can make those squares
are called rational.    Any quantity can be multiplied so many times
that it exceeds any given quantity of the same kind.

Proposition.    1.

If two unequal quantities are proposed, the greater is to be taken away by half from the greater; and likewise from the remainder greater by half
from itself in the same manner: it is necessary that at last
a quantity less than the lesser proposed be left.
Let there be two unequal quantities a. and b.c.b.c. the greater. I say that as many times as the greater is taken away by half
a.b.c. or from its remainder, it will be necessary that a remainder less than the lesser quantity be left.
Let a be multiplied as many times as it exceeds b.c. and let it be in the multiple c.d.e. for b.c. is
to be taken away from a.b.c. by the greater half which is b.g. and likewise from the remainder which is g.e. the greater by
half which is g.h. let this also be done so many times until b.c. the remainder is so many times first as many
times it contains i.d.e.f. I say then that the last remainder is here h.c. let it be greater than a. let it be multiplied