MEASURING-ART. Book 10. 313

Just as the proposed straight line; which is set forth as certain and known,
is called rational. So also the square arising from the same, or described
upon the same, is called rational: since it also is certain and known, and
other planes, being compared with the same, are said to be measurable or
immeasurable.

The ninth Definition.
And [ all planes ] which are measurable with this [ proposed square ] are
Rationals.

All planes, which are measurable with the square of the proposed rational
line, which is rational, are called rational, not from the setting forth of that
square, but because, being compared with the same, they are found to be
measurable.

The tenth Definition.
And [ all planes ] which are immeasurable with this [ proposed square ] are
also Irrationals.

Likewise all planes, which are immeasurable with the square of the proposed
rational line, which also is rational, are called Irrationals, not from the
setting forth, but because, being compared with the rational square, they are
found to be immeasurable.

The eleventh Definition.
And the straight lines, which have power of the same [ irrational planes ] are
Irrationals: for if the same [ planes ] are squares, so are the straight lines
their sides: but if they are some other straight-lined [ figures ], which
rightly describe squares, which are equal to [ def ] immeasurable rhombi.

Here the straight lines are called irrational, which have power of the planes
that are immeasurable with a square of a certain rational line; just as those
same planes are said to be irrationals. It is customary among the old
geometers, that it is said a straight line has power of a space or plane,
when the square of that straight line is equal to the said rhombus or plane:
from which also it clearly appears, when the said irrational planes are
squares, that the irrational straight lines are their sides: but if those planes
are other straight-lined rhombi, those immeasurable rhombi are to be equal
to the squares of these irrational straight lines.
With reason it cannot here be passed over that the old geometers

R r

defe