THE TENTH ELEMENT.

[uncertain: measuring] each of the two, the powers also will be incommensurable, because as is clear
from the 13th definition their squares have no common area, which could measure each
square described on them.

FROM CLAVIUS.

BUT if someone should ask why Euclid defines only lines commensurable in power, and not those commensurable in length,
it must be answered that lines commensurable in length have been explained sufficiently and more than sufficiently in the definition of commensurable magnitudes,
since such lines are measured by one common measure, as has been said. But because lines commensurable in power
cannot be measured by any common measure, but only their squares measure the same area; therefore it was
necessary altogether that they be explained by a proper definition.

SCHOLIUM.

HERE the reader must note what is to be understood by the power of a line. For the power of any line is nothing else than
the square described on it.

DEFINITION. IIII.

INCOMMENSURABLES, however, with their squares, no area
which is a common measure of them happens to be found.

ALL lines which admit no common measure, whose squares also
have no area as a common measure, are rightly called by Euclid incommensurable in power,
as is easy to gather from the preceding definition.

FROM CLAVIUS.

LINES commensurable in length have, however, that they can hence be commensurated in power among themselves, and so that
as lines commensurable in length, they are also commensurable in power: but indeed many lines can be given commensurable
in length, and the areas of their squares are also commensurable, since the square described on their common measure
measures each of their squares as the common measure of their squares, as appears in the figure set below.

l
16
e            4            f c
h
4
d a
g
l
b

JUST AS for the straight line a b measures the straight lines c d, e f, so also the square a g measures the squares c b, e i:
but not so that all lines commensurable in power are also commensurable in length: for many lines are commensurable in power,
that is, have commensurable squares, which nevertheless are altogether incommensurable in length, as in this book we shall
demonstrate.

Again among incommensurable lines both in length and in power, such a connection is found, that all lines incommensurable in power
are also incommensurable in length: but not conversely, that all lines incommensurable in length are also incommensurable in power:
since indeed many lines are found incommensurable in length with one another, when [text breaks off]
A ij