30

EUCLID’S ELEMENTS
TENTH

Commensurable magnitudes are said to be those measured by the same
measure. Incommensurable, those for which no common
measure can be found. Straight lines are incommensurable in power when
the squares on them are measurable by the same areas.
And they are incommensurable when, for the squares on them, no
common measure can be found. With these things laid down it is shown
that, to the straight line set forth, there exist straight lines in an infinite multitude,
both commensurable and incommensurable: some in length and in power, and others in power only.
— Let the straight line set forth be called rational. — And those commensurable with it,
whether in length and in power, or in power only, (are) rational. But those incommensurable with it,
let them be called irrational. And the square on the straight line set forth (is) rational,
and those commensurable with it. But those incommensurable with it,
let them be called irrational; and those (commensurable) in power with it, irrational. And if (they are) squares,
their sides, or let them be some rectilinear figures, and their squares
they describe.

If two unequal magnitudes are set out, and from the greater there be subtracted
a measure or a half, and the remainder (be) greater than a half,
and this happens repeatedly, there will be left a magnitude which is less
than the lesser of the magnitudes set out. Let there be two unequal magnitudes,
AB, GD, of which AB is the greater. I say that if from AB there be subtracted a measure or a half, and the remainder (be) greater than a half,
and this happens repeatedly, there will be left a magnitude which is less
than the lesser magnitude set out. For let the magnitude AB be multiplied some number of times; let
it be multiplied, and let it be DE. Let G be a multiple of AB, greater than
a half of DE. Since the AB’s equal to G are either K, or E; and if there be subtracted from AB more than a half, BZ,
and from DE more than a half, HΘ; and whatever happens; if from one of the
divisions of AB there be made an equal number to the divisions of DE of GD; let
AK and BΘ be divisions, equal in number to the divisions of GD (or KE). Since
DE is greater than AB, and from the half EZ has been subtracted, and from AB
more than a half BZ; therefore the remainder DK. Therefore DK is greater than DZ; and
still further HΘ is greater than DZ. And from the half HΘ has been subtracted, and from
DE more than a half DK; therefore the remainder ZK. Therefore AK is greater than DZ; and DZ is equal to G; and
therefore G is left from AK greater than a half; therefore AK is less.
And similarly it will be shown, even if the things subtracted are halves. With two
unequal magnitudes set out AB, GD, let GD be less still than a lesser than G.
Let the magnitude AB be multiplied some number of times; let it become
ZI. And let it be divided into the equals of G, HΘ or K. And from AB let there be subtracted
more than a half EB, and from DE more than a half HΘ, and thus it will be shown that
[illegible]

A  B  G  D  E  Z  H  TH  I  K