EUCLID’S

[illegible]; but if there are any other rectilinear [lines], straight [lines], which describe equal
squares to incommensurable spaces.

Euclid calls lines which can [produce] irrational spaces, or irrational squares, Irrational:
just as those squares are also called Irrational. But those spaces are irrational,
when they are incommensurable with the square on a Rational line. Thus if those spaces are squares, the
lines from which those squares are described are Irrational.
    But if those spaces are not squares, but other rectilinear figures, the lines capable of [producing] those
spaces are called Irrational.

FROM CLAVIUS.

BESIDES ONE THING I ask is not [clear], that Euclid and the ancient geometers in this book use the term “in length and power,” and
“in power only”: and that they often always add to the words commensurable and incommensurable: but scarcely and
very rarely these: Rational and Irrational. For straight lines are called commensurable in length and power, or in power
only. Likewise incommensurable in length and power, or in power only. I indicate moreover that rightly the Rational in length and
power, or in power only, are the Irrational in length and power, or in power only. Which indeed, since Campanus did not
notice, provided occasion for many, that variously and obscurely in this 10th book, concerning commensurable and incommensurable lines,
and also Rational and Irrational, they have spoken.
    Moreover to these definitions we shall add one postulate, and some pronouncements, whose use is found in this book.

Postulate or Petition.

FROM CLAVIUS.

LET IT BE POSTULATED, that any magnitude can be multiplied so many times, until
it exceeds any magnitude of the same kind.

FOR, two unequal magnitudes of the same kind being proposed, since the greater is not infinite, but the lesser can be increased infinitely,
it is evident that the lesser can be multiplied so many times, until it surpasses the greater.
    This is also established from those things which we wrote in Def. 5 of Book 5. For there we said that those magnitudes are then at last
judged to be of the same kind, when either can be so multiplied, that it exceeds the other.
And from the failure of this condition, we taught that a rectilinear angle and an angle of contact are of different
kinds.

Axioms or Pronouncements.

AXIOM I.

A MAGNITUDE measuring however many magnitudes, also measures the composite
[from] them.

AXIOM II.

A MAGNITUDE measuring any magnitude, also measures every
magnitude which that [magnitude] measures.

AXIOM III.

A MAGNITUDE measuring the whole magnitude, and the part taken away, also measures the
remainder.