188  
TENTH

the three lines FH, EH, CH, will be continually pro-
portional in the ratio of FE to EC, or BD to DG: & by
22.p.6.& 10.p.10. as the square of BD is commensur. with the
square of DC, (for those squares are commensur. since
BD,DC are the names of the binome BC) so that the square of
EH, will be commensur. with the square of CH: & by the corol. of the
20.p.6.& 10.p.10. CH will be commens. in length with the third
proportional FH; & by 16.p.10. CH & CF will be
commens. in length. And inasmuch as the rectangle DF is ra-
tional (being equal to the square of the rational line A) & DC
a rational line; CF will also be a rational line commensur. in
length with CD, by 21.p.10. And CH will be a surd rational co-
mmens. in length with CD, by 12.p.10.& by 10.p.10. as
CD & DB are rational commens. in power only,
so also CH, EH, will be rational commens. in power
only: & therefore by 74.p.10. CE will be a residual: of which
the names EH, CH, are proportional, & commens. with the names
BD,DC, of the binome BC: For it has been demonstrated that as
BD is to DG, so EH to CH; & therefore by alternation as
BD will be to EH; so DC to CH. But DC, CH have been
demonstrated commens. in length by 10.p.10. BD, EH, will
therefore also be commens. in length.

It remains then to prove that the residual is of the same order as
the binome: Now the names of the one being proportional, & co-
mmensurable with the names of the other: by 15.p.10. as the greater
name of the binome can exceed the smaller by the
square of a line which will be commensurable with it, or incommens. in
length: the greater name of the residual can exceed by the
same: And if the greater name of the binome is commensurable
in length with the rational: so also will be the greater of the residual
by 12.p.10.& they will be first binome, & first residual.
And if the smaller name of the binome is commens. in length
with the rational: so also will be the smaller of the residual; & they will be
second binome & residual. And if neither the one nor the other name of the
binome is commens. with the rational; likewise neither the one nor the
other name of the residual will be commens. with the same rational:
And they will be third binome, & third residual: & so of the others.

SCHOLIUM.

If the rational A is 8, the binome BC 9 + √ 45. such that BD is
9, & CD √ 45: the square of A being applied on BC, the other side of