252        THE TENTH ELEMENT        Book 10.

Euclid, according to his custom, begins here by the explanation of the
terms which he ought to use: and declares in the first place what
Magnitudes are said to be commensurable,
and which incommensurable; defining that
those are said to be commensurable, which
are measured by one and the same common
measure, or Magnitude: As the Magnitudes

A
B
C

A and B, which one and the same measure, as C does measure (for be-
ing repeated six times, it measures A, and being repeated three times, it
measures B) shall be said to be commensurable.
After the same manner, a line of 20 palms, and one of 13, are said to be
commensurable; seeing that as well the line of one palm, as that of half
a palm, &c. measures both of them: In like manner, those Surfaces
are said to be commensurable that are measured by one and the same Sur-
face, and solid bodies are also said to be commensurable; when they are
measured by one and the same Solid,

2 But incommensurable Magnitudes are those which have no
common measure.

Such Magnitudes are the Diameter of any square, and the side of the
same square of which it is the Diameter: inasmuch as there is no com-
mon Magnitude that can measure them both, as shall be demonstrated in
the last Proposition of this Book: There are also various other incom-
mensurable lines, various of which are unfolded in this Book; and the manner
how to find them is shown: Again, Surfaces and Solids are said to be
incommensurable, which admit of no common measure.

F √418  D
√418
18
R
√162
Q
P
√162
A
C √162  H
√162
B
K E
L
M
T
N √162
S

3 Right lines AB, and BD, are com-
mensurable in power, when their
squares BM, and BF, are mea-
sured by one and the same Space or
Surface E.

Of right lines, some are commensurable
in Length, namely those which are mea-
sured by one and the same line, and are
said simply or absolutely commensurable; some others are said to be in-
commensurable, that is to say, such as have no common measure, as has
been explained in the first and second Definitions.
Again, of Lines which are incommensurable in Length, some of them
are so in such manner that their squares are commensurable; as a line
of two feet, and another which shall be √q. 8 (that is to say, whose
square shall contain 8 feet) are said to be commensurable in power,
the squares 4 and 8 being measured by one and the same Surface. So a
line of three feet, and a line of √6 feet, shall also be commensurable in pow-
er, seeing their squares 9 and 36 are measured by one and the same Sur-
face; namely by 3, or by 6.        Again,

Book 10.        OF EUCLID.        253

Again, a line which shall be √q of 20, and one that shall be √q 125,
are commensurable in power; for their √q √q 20, and √q √q 125, are
commensurable; being as 5 to 2, and √q 5 shall be in √q 20 twice,
and in √q 125 five times, which will be more easily understood by this figure,
where the line AB is 3, and is q B M 9, whose Diameter is also B M, namely
A B is incommensurable, as has been said in the 2 Definition; and having
drawn B D equal to the Diameter B M, and described the square B F, the
same shall be 18; it being double the square of B A; and this side shall be
√q 18 commensurable in power to B A: for B measures both the one and
the other squares, namely B M 9 times; and B F 18 times, E tripled mea-
sures also B F 6 times, and B M 3 times.

Now if you will have the square E to be √q 96, the q of the line A B,
make √q 486, and the q of B D shall make √q 1944; and √q 96 shall mea-
sure both, √q 54, the triple of √q 16, shall also measure these two quantities.

4 But Right Lines are incommensurable in power, when the
squares made of them cannot be measured by any common measure.

The other incommensurable lines, whose squares are also incommen-
surable, are said to be incommensurable in power, as a line of 2 feet, and
a line which shall be √6, shall be incommensurable in power; as not
having any common space that may measure their squares 4 and √6: So
√q 8 and √q 12 are also incommensurable in power; inasmuch as
no Surface can measure their squares 8 and √q 12.
Again, as in the figure of the third Definition, the rectangular Sur-
face P B is proposed √q 162, to which let the square Surface
B H be made equal, the line G B, or B L, is equal; shall be incommen-
surable in power to B C, or B N; for B C is a mean proportional between
G B and B A, or B E, equal to B A: therefore G B, B C, and B E, being
continually proportional; the q G D, the square of G B, is to B H, the square of
B C, as G B the first is to B E the third: But G B is incommensurable to
B E, as has been said in the second Definition: therefore the square of
G B, which is G D, shall be incommensurable to the square of B C; that
is to say, to B H: therefore G B and C, or B N, is equal, are incommen-
surable in power; that is to say, their squares are incommensurable: and
this may not be thought strange, that this Demonstration be built on the Pro-
positions hereafter mentioned; for it is not necessary for the Demon-
stration of any of them.
Now all the right lines commensurable in Length are so also in power,
seeing that the square of their common measure also measures their
squares, as appears by this figure: For as
A B measures C D and E F, so the square
of A B measures C H and E I, not that
all the right lines which are commensura-
ble in power are so also in length, as ap-
pears by the figure of the third Definition,
where the lines A B and B D are shown to be
incommensurable in length, which are
shown commensurable in power, and as it
shall be also demonstrated in this Book.

I
H
E  F C  D  A  B

5 These