252        THE TENTH ELEMENT        Lib. 10.

EƲclid, according to his cuſtom, begins here by the explication of the
terms which he ought to uſe: and declareth in the firſt place what
Magnitudes are ſaid to be commenſurable,
and which incommenſurable; defining that
thoſe are ſaid to be commenſurable, which
are meaſured by one and the ſame common
meaſure, or Magnitude: As the Magnitudes

A
B
C

A and B, the which one and the ſame meaſure, as C doth meaſure (for be-
ing repeated ſix times, it meaſureth A, and being repeated three times, it
meaſureth B) ſhall be ſaid to be commenſurable.
After the ſame manner, a line of 20 palmes, and one of 13, are ſaid to be
commenſurable; ſeeing that as well the line of one palme, as that of halfe
a palme, &c. meaſureth both of them: In like manner, thoſe Superficies
are ſaid to be commenſurable that are meaſured by one and the ſame Super-
ficies, and ſolid bodies are alſo ſaid to be commenſurable; when they are
meaſured by one and the ſame Solid,

2 But Magnitudes incommenſurable, are thoſe which have no
common meaſure.

SUch Magnitudes are the Diameter of any ſquare, and the ſide of the
ſame ſquare whereof it is the Diameter: foraſmuch as there is no com-
mon Magnitude that can meaſure them both, as ſhall be demonſtrated in
the laſt Proposition of this Book: There are alſo divers other lines incom-
menſurable, divers of which are unfolded in this Book; and the manner
how to find them, is ſhewn: Again, Superficies and Solids, are ſaid to be
incommenſurable, the which admit of no common meaſure.

F √418  D
√418
18
R
√162
Q
P
√162
A
C √162  H
√162
B
K E
L
M
T
N √162
S

3 Right lines AB, and BD, are com-
menſurable in power, when their
ſquares BM, and BF, are mea-
ſured by one and the ſame Space or
Superficies E.

OF Right-lines, ſome are commenſurable
in Length, to wit, thoſe which are mea-
ſured by one and the ſame line, and are
ſaid ſimply or abſolutely commenſurable, ſome others are ſaid to be in-
commenſurable, that is to ſay, ſuch as have no common meaſure, as hath
been expounded in the firſt and ſecond Definitions.
Again, of Lines which are incommenſurable in Length, ſome of them
are ſo, in ſuch manner as that their ſquares are commenſurable; as a line
of two feet, and another, which ſhall be √q. 8, (that is to ſay, of the which
the ſquare ſhall contein 8 feet) are ſaid to be commenſurable in power,
the ſquares 4, and 8, being meaſured by one and the ſame Superficies. So a
line of three feet, and a line of √6 feet, ſhall be alſo commenſurable in pow-
er, ſeeing their ſquares 9, and 36, are meaſured by one and the ſame Su-
perficies; to wit, by 3, or by 6.        Again,

Lib. 10.        OF EUCLIDE.        253

Again, a line which ſhall be √q of 20, and one that ſhall be √q 125,
are commenſurable in power; for their √q √q 20, and √q √q 125, are
commenſurable; being as 5, to 2, and √q 5, ſhall be in √q 20, twice,
and in √q 125, 5 times, which will be more eaſily underſtood by this figure,
where the line AB is 3, and is q B M 9, whoſe Diameter is alſo B M, to wit
A B is incommenſurable, as hath been ſaid in the 2 Definition; and having
drawn B D equall to the Diameter B M, and deſcribed the ſquare B F, the
ſame ſhall be 18; it being double the ſquare of B A; and this ſide ſhall be
√q 18 commenſurable in power to B A: for B meaſureth both the one and
the other ſquares, to wit, B M 9 times; and B F 18 times, E tripled mea-
ſureth alſo B F 6 times, and B M 3 times.

Now if you will have the ſquare E to be √q 96, the q of the line A B,
make √q 486, and the q of B D, ſhall make √q 1944; and √q 96, ſhall mea-
ſure both, √q 54, the triple of √q 16, ſhall alſo meaſure theſe two quantities.

4 But Right Lines are incommenſurable in power, when the
ſquares made of them cannot be meaſured by any common meaſure.

THe other lines incommenſurable, whoſe ſquares are alſo incommen-
ſurable, are ſaid to be incommenſurable in power, as a line of 2 feet, and
a line which ſhall be √6, ſhall be incommenſurable in power; as not
having any common ſpace that may meaſure their ſquares 4, and √6: So
√q 8, and √q 12, are alſo incommenſurable in power; foraſmuch as
no Superficies can meaſure their ſquares 8 and √q 12.
Again, as in the figure of the third Definition, the rectangled Superfi-
cies P B, is propoſed √q 162, to the which a let the ſquare Superficies
B H, be made equall, the line G B, or B L, is equall; ſhall be incommen-
ſurable in power to B C, or B N; for B C is a mean proportionall between
G B, and B A, or B E, equall to B A: therefore G B, B C, and B E, being
continually proportionall; the q G D the ſquare of G B, is to B H the ſquare of
B C, as G B the firſt, to B E the third: But G B is incommenſurable to
B E, as hath been ſaid in the ſecond Definition: therefore the ſquare of
G B, which is G D, ſhall be incommenſurable to the ſquare of B C; that
is to ſay, to B H: therefore G B, and C, or B N, is equall, are incommen-
ſurable in power; that is to ſay, their ſquares are incommenſurable: and
this may not be thought ſtrange, that this Demonſtration be built on the Pro-
poſitions hereafter mentioned; for that it is not neceſſary for the Demon-
ſtration of any of them.
Now all the right lines commenſurable in Length, are ſo alſo in power,
ſeeing that the ſquare of their common meaſure, doth alſo meaſure their
ſquares, as appears by this figure: For as
A B meaſureth C D, and E F, ſo the ſquare
of A B, doth meaſure C H, and E I, not that
all the right lines which are commenſura-
ble in power, are ſo alſo in length, as ap-
pears by the figure of the third Definition,
where the lines A B and B D, are ſhewn to be
incommenſurable in length, the which are
ſhewn commenſurable in power, and as it
ſhall be alſo demonſtrated in this Book.

I
H
E  F C  D  A  B

5 Theſe