B O O K  X.                                                                 201

That lines commensurable in length are also commensurable in power,
so that no lines can be given commensurable in length whose squares
are not also commensurable; since the common measure of the squares, &c.,
measures the described [figure] as a common measure measures their squares,
as appears in the figure set below: for if, as the straight line A B
measures the straight lines C D, E F, so also the square
A G measures the squares C H, E I:
But not [so], that all lines commensurable in power are also commensurable in length;
for many lines are commensurable in power, that is, have commensurable squares,
which nevertheless are altogether incommensurable in length, as will be demonstrated
in this book. Again, among lines incommensurable both in length and in power,
a connection of this kind is found, that all lines incommensurable in power
are also incommensurable in length; but not conversely, that all lines
incommensurable in length are also incommensurable in power,
since many lines are found merely incommensurable with one another in length,
yet are commensurable in power, that is, according to their squares.
Which certain things will all be set down afterwards from the corollary of prop. 9
of this book.

                                    V.

These things being set down, it is shown that, to any proposed straight line,
there are infinitely many straight lines both commensurable and incommensurable:
some indeed in length and in power; others however in power only.
Let the proposed straight line be called Rational.

If some straight line be proposed, known in magnitude, there will be, of all other
[lines] which are compared with it, some commensurable with it in length and power,
and some in power only. Likewise some incommensurable with it in length only,
and some in length and power, as will be demonstrated in various places in this tenth book.
For Euclid does not wish it to be shown or gathered from what has been said
(although his words may seem to sound thus) that these things are so;
but he only indicates to us, and in some way hints, that some lines can be said
to be commensurable with the proposed straight line in length and power,
and others in power only, &c. Which indeed in no way follows from what has been said,
but will be demonstrated in what follows, as we have said.

And that proposed line, by the ratio of which others are commensurable
or incommensurable, is called by the Greeks ῥητὴ; but by the Latins Rational;
since it is always set down as certain and known, but the others, compared with it,
are not always known, although each of them always exists certain and known;
since any one can be divided into any equal parts whatsoever.

A N D