B O O K  X.                                                                 205

measurable, or incommensurable* just as also
lines which are in whatever way commensurable with a Rational line
are called Rational.

BUT SINCE lines which can produce spaces commensurable
with the square on a given Rational line are at least in power
commensurable with the Rational line, from Def. 3 it is clear
that they too are to be called, according to Def. 6, Rational.

X.
But the incommensurable ones with this are to be
called Irrational.

In no other way are plane surfaces incommensurable with the square
described on a Rational line called Irrational, than lines which are
altogether incommensurable with a given Rational [line] are said to be
Irrational.

XI.
And straight lines which can themselves [produce them] are Irrational: if indeed those
are squares, the sides themselves; but if they are some other rectilinear
[figures], the straight lines which describe squares equal to spaces
incommensurable [with them].

He calls lines which can produce spaces incommensurable with the square
on a Rational line, Irrational: just as he also called the spaces themselves
Irrational: so that if the incommensurable spaces are indeed squares,
their sides are called Irrational; but if they are not squares, but any other
rectilinear figures, the straight lines which describe squares equal to those
incommensurable spaces are called Irrational.

It is gathered, moreover, that lines which can produce spaces incommensurable
with the square on a Rational line ought to be called Irrational, from Def. 7;
just as above from Def. 6 we gathered that lines which can produce spaces
incommensurable with the same square on a Rational line ought to be called
Rational. For the lines which can produce those incommensurable spaces are
in power incommensurable with the Rational line, from Def. 4. Therefore since
all lines incommensurable in power are also incommensurable in length, as we
said at Def. 4, and it will be demonstrated in the corollary of Prop. 9, it is
manifest, from Def. 7, that those lines which can produce spaces incommensurable
with the square on a Rational line are to be called Irrational.

Nor is it to be passed over, that Euclid and the ancient
Geometers almost always add these words: in length and in power; and in power
only; to these words: commensurable and
incommensurable: but scarcely, and very rarely, to these: Rational, and
Irrational: for lines commensurable in length are rightly said—
in length