TENTH BOOK OF THE ELEMENTS.

[uncertain: …] a measure measuring each of the two, they will also be incommensurable in power, because, as is clear
from the 13th definition, their squares have no common area, which could measure each
square described on them.

FROM CLAVIUS.

BUT if someone should ask why Euclid perhaps defines lines commensurable in power, and not commensurable in
length, it must be answered that lines commensurable in length have been explained sufficiently and more than sufficiently
in the definition of commensurable magnitudes, since one common measure measures lines of this kind, as has been said.
But because lines commensurable in power cannot be measured by any common measure, but only their squares measure the same space,
therefore it was altogether necessary that they be explained by a proper definition.

SCHOLIUM.

HERE the Reader must note what is to be understood by the power of a line. For the power of any line is nothing else than
the square described on it.

DEFINITION. IV.

INCOMMENSURABLES, moreover, with their squares: no space
which is a common measure of them happens to be found.

ALL lines which admit no common measure, whose squares also
have no area as a common measure, are rightly called by Euclid incommensurable in power,
as is easy to gather from the preceding definition.

FROM CLAVIUS.

Lines commensurable in length, however, have this commensuration in power, and so that
lines commensurable in length are also commensurable in power; but no lines can be given commensurable
in length whose squares are also commensurable, since the square described on their common measure
measures their squares as a common measure, as appears in the figure set below.

l
16
e            4            f c      h
                         4
                              d a      g
                                     l
                                     b

FOR just as the straight line a b measures the straight lines c d, e f, so also the square a g measures the squares c b, e i:
but not [so] that all lines commensurable in power are also commensurable in length; for many lines are commensurable in power,
that is, they have commensurable squares, which nevertheless are altogether incommensurable in length, as we shall demonstrate in this book.

Again, among lines incommensurable both in length and in power, a connection of this kind is found, that all lines
incommensurable in power are also incommensurable in length; but not conversely, that all lines incommensurable in length
are also incommensurable in power; since many lines are found incommensurable in length with one another, when [uncertain: …]
A ij