4

EUCLID
but in power, that is, according to their squares, they may be commensurable. Which things indeed will all be clear from the corollary to
proposition 9 of this book.

DEFINITION V.

With these things set down it is shown that, to any proposed straight line, there are infinitely many straight lines both commensurable and
incommensurable: some indeed in length and in power, others however in power only. Let the proposed straight line be called
Rational.

To every proposed line, all other lines which are compared to it will be either commensurable or
incommensurable.

Commensurable indeed, if those lines which are compared to the proposed line have with the
proposed [line] some common measure measuring both; as if the line a is proposed, and
b and c are compared to it, it is evident that those lines b and c are commensurable with the
proposed line a, since among themselves those lines have a common measure measuring both, namely d.

a
b
c
d

4
3
2
1

e
f
g
h

R V 8
R V 5
R V V 40
R V V 56

INCOMMENSURABLE however, if the lines which are compared to the proposed line
do not have any common measure; as if the lines e and f, irrational, are compared to a, because
between those lines no common measure is found, therefore they will be incommensurable in length with a, e,
and f, although in power they are commensurable.
Again, if the lines g and h are compared to the rational a, then a, g and h will be among themselves both in length
and in power incommensurable.
In length indeed, since they have no common measure among themselves.
In power however, because their squares have no common area which could measure
the squares described on them.

FROM CLAVIUS.
But that proposed line, to which those commensurable or incommensurable [lines] have a ratio, is called by the Greeks, and in Latin
however Rational, because it is always set down as a straight line, so that none is truly compared with it that is not always known, although the single ones
taken separately exist as certain and also known, since it can be divided into as many equal parts as one may wish.

DEFINITION VI.

And those commensurable with it either in length and in power, or in power
only, [are] Rational.

If any line is commensurable with the proposed rational [line], either in length or in power, without
doubt that line is rational.
Hence it is gathered that every proposed line considered absolutely and simply is rational,
since it can be divided into so many equal parts as one may wish: therefore those commensurable with it either
in length and in power together, or in power only, will be rational.

E X