EUCL. ELEMENTS. GEOM.

the species or nature of the units, that is, with a number not having a root, we can draw out the same root.
For since it has no units of this number (because it has no root), it is plainly left
that the units applied to it are foreign to the units of the former number, since if they were not foreign
they would express the root of the number, which cannot happen, since it has none, by hypothesis.
The same we shall say in any root of numbers, whether square, or cubic, or surd, or solid, or whatever other
it may be. Therefore, whatever quantities are composed of certain units will be certain. But whatever
can be composed of those same units, let them be called uncertain, as if composed of foreign units.
Yet it might be objected that a rectangular quadrilateral contained under lines only in power incommensurable
is not called certain, although those lines are called certain. To this we shall say that the length of each of these
lines, as we have already said, is not certain, and that rectangle which it produces by that uncertain length,
but that the power of each of them is only certain, which gives the name of certainty to the line by its power.
Therefore the rectangle consisting of their certain power will be certain, which indeed will be produced from their
uncertain length. It will be uncertain, as is more fully evident in the twenty-first proposition of this.
For that cause we shall say that uncertain rectangles are chiefly generated in two ways,
from two certain [lines] incommensurable in length only. Namely, when a rectangle is contained under them,
by the twenty-first; when from them joined a square is [made], by the thirty-sixth;
and when the lesser is taken from the greater, the remainder of the square (by the seventy-third of this), as afterwards
we shall see. This is the cause that in these ways the lengths are always preserved incommensurable with one another,
and therefore they produce an uncertain [area]. But if their power (which is commensurable) joined together
compose a plane, that will necessarily be certain, since it consists of a commensurable power of a certain power.

Definition eleventh.

And those [are] powers, uncertain. If indeed they are squares, their sides [are]
uncertain. But if they are some other rectilinear [figures], the lines describing squares equal to those
[rectilinear figures] will be uncertain.

Euclid takes for himself a future manner of speaking, when he says, “and those [are] powers”; for the powers, that is,
those planes which we said are incommensurable to a given certain plane, are called uncertain, whatever rectilinear
they may be. For if they are squares, their sides will be uncertain lines. But if they are other
rectilinear [figures], the lines describing squares equal to those rectilinear [figures] are likewise called uncertain.
For we said that the power of a line is the surface equal to the square described on it. Therefore
when a line, multiplied by its units, generates a square surface, we said that the surface itself is generated from the units
of the line itself. If therefore the units of the generated surface are foreign to the units of the proposed surface
(by hypothesis), since they are incommensurable, it will follow that the units of the surface generated by the proposed certain
line are foreign to the units of the line generating an incommensurable area. Therefore a power, or a straight line generating
an incommensurable area to a certain plane, will be called uncertain, because it has within itself units foreign to the proposed certain [one].
Euclid says that this is one and the same, whatever the planes may be.
For if they are squares, he speaks of their sides, or root. But if they are other rectilinear [figures],
that is, rectangles, parallelograms, pentagons, trapezia, etc. Since each is reduced into triangles and then
into squares (by the fourteenth of the second). He understands the sides of those squares equal to the aforesaid
rectilinear [figures] to be called uncertain: because they produce areas equal to uncertain areas, and therefore uncertain.
But because we said that a square surface is made from the units composing that line,
it is necessary to recall those things which we said at the end of the first definition of the seventh, namely that units always follow
the nature of that to which they are applied. But we know that the units of a line are infinite, nor can they generate a surface,
since they lack breadth. But when we say that a surface is generated by the units of a line, we shall understand
that those units are each contained under two units of the proposed line, in which the units are cut,
and by this law they are rectangles, contained under two lines, by the first definition of the [tenth?] book. These
will be called the units measuring the square of the whole proposed straight [line], and setting forth the nature of the square itself,
which we said is always contained under a single line. Indeed if two lines are produced, whose rectangle contained by them
we wish to distinguish as a unit, one of them (whatever it may be)
we can always call the proposed certain [line], to which the other is to be compared; which if by units commensurable with the proposed
certain [line] it can be distinguished, these units, each taken from the two lines, [are] rectangu-
les