TENTH BOOK.                                                                 99

OF EUCLID

THE TENTH
ELEMENTS

DEFINITIONS.
I.

Magnitudes are called COMMENSURABLE, which the same
measure measures.

Euclid has completed in the preceding nine books those things concerning numbers and ratios, as
much as was sufficient, and for understanding geometrical matters. Now in this tenth book he
proceeds to the discussion of commensurable and incommensurable lines, for whose sake we said
above that the treatment of numbers was undertaken by him. For without knowledge of these
lines many magnitudes, both solid and plane, can neither be perfectly understood, nor, with a
clearer account, be applied to use in work 43; because most of their sides are incommensurable.
Which can also be said of the planes themselves as of the solids, since these too for the most part
have incommensurable sides, as we shall show at the end of this book. And since this book is
very obscure and difficult, because of the obscurity of the lines of which it treats, I shall strain
every nerve of my industry in it, so that from those things which have thus far been demonstrated
by Euclid, it may be made so plain and easy that without much labor and inquiry, whoever has
rightly understood the demonstrations of the preceding books only, may be able to grasp it. Nor
indeed can I go along with the opinion of those who think that for its understanding that part of
Arithmetic is necessary which treats of the roots of numbers, both rational and irrational, as they
call them. Indeed, on the contrary, I have moreover persuaded myself that a perfect knowledge
of that part of Arithmetic depends on this 10th book; so far is it from my requiring that, in order
that this book may be more easily understood, that knowledge of roots be required. I would not
deny, however, that he who understands the theory of roots and calculation will perceive this book
with greater pleasure than one who is altogether ignorant of them; because the former can bring
the demonstrations back to use, but the latter in no way. For this reason we also adapted the first
ten theorems of the second book to numbers, so that he might take greater delight from that study,
and also (because) we thought that those things which are demonstrated there could be more easily
understood by beginners. “Why then,” someone will say, “did you not likewise in that book, and
also in this, use examples of numbers, employing the Algebra we use, so that the matter would be
both more pleasant and more convenient for readers?” The ready reason is why we judged that to
be omitted. For since there are at this time very few for whom that celebrated art of Algebra is
familiar, and who have been practiced in it, if such things were introduced they would rather
obscure tender minds than give them any greater clarity and perspicuity; since thus they would
make the minds of students, for the help and light which we labor to bring by these commentaries,
more rough than aided, and would obscure the demonstrations themselves. Which could not have
happened in book 2, because addition of whole numbers and multiplication, which alone we almost
use there, almost no one is ignorant of unless he is altogether unlearned. To this is added that those
who are practiced in Algebra can easily adapt the demonstrations of this book to numbers by
themselves, whenever they wish. Besides, since this very thing not long before had been diligently
done and published by Michael Stifel, a noble arithmetician, in the 2nd book of the work which he
entitled On Integer Arithmetic, etc.

And to return to the matter at hand: beginning the subject itself, Euclid, in his manner, from
explanations of the terms which will be used, declares first of all what magnitudes are called
commensurable, defining them to be those which the same measure measures. Thus two magnitudes
A, B, which the same measure C measures (for C measures A itself, repeated four times, etc.,
and three times, that is, it measures B itself), are called commensurable. In the same way
commensurable are a line of 20 palms and a line of 13 palms, because a line of one palm, or of
half a palm, or of a third part of one palm, etc., measures them. Likewise surfaces are called
commensurable which are measured by one and the same measure. Likewise bodies, and solids,
are commensurable which are measured by the same body, or solid.

A   B   C

1 2