BOOK X.
The Translator.

I
This definition is much broader and more general than the other, because this one
wants that even those lines which are commensurable only in power
with our proposed rational (only with our measure of pace, or
rod, or other kind of measure) be called rational, because it follows that
those quantities which commonly by practitioners are called surd roots, and ir-
rational (as would be the square root of ten or of twelve and of every
other non-square number) the author wants that, since such quantities are lines, they be
called rational (because their square is rational); and if it were not so, there would follow
this great discord in the definitions of binomials and remainders, and in other propo-
sitions of this tenth [book], as proceeding one may easily know; it is
true that if such quantities are surfaces they will then be called irrational and medial,
as in the thirteenth proposition of this [book] one may see,

Definition vi.

6
4  And those lines which will be incommensurable with the same are
   called irrational, or surds.

The Translator.

A
Also this definition must be understood as joined successively
to the preceding of the first translation; because in this he defines
that all those lines which will not be commensurable with the same our pro-
posed straight line (that is, with our proposed material measure) are called irrational
lines, or surds; nevertheless this same definition in the second trans-
lation speaks in another way, namely.

And those lines which will be incommensurable with that in one
and the other way, that is in length and in power, are called
irrational.

I
Which definition, understanding it as joined successively with the prece-
ding (indeed of the second translation), comes to conform with the converse
of that, that is, that a line incommensurable only in length with our
measure ought not to be called, nor understood [as] irrational (as above the
preceding was said); rather he wants it to be understood rational because its
square is rational; and therefore it is necessary to note that the common crowd of practitioners up to the present (fol-
lowing the translation of Campanus) are accustomed to say of all non-square numbers,
and calling lines as if they were surfaces, they call them irrational and surds. none-
the-less they must be understood rational, being lines, as the second
translation speaks; otherwise there would follow (as I said above) great discord in
the places that will follow in this tenth [book], therefore etc.

Definition vii.

7
0  But every square surface with which, by the presupposed
   reasoning, is called rational.

The Translator.

P
For greater understanding of this definition it is necessary to note that they square-
will decide to know the quantity of some surface, what they are in what
proportion