490                     TENTH

surable in power only: and therefore the squares of them
BG, GE are commens., and consequently the lines BG, FG
which have the same ratio as those squares, are commensurable,
in length, by the same 10.p.10. And by the corol. of the 16.p
10. BG, BF will also be commensurable in length.  And
inasmuch as BD the greater name of the remainder BC is rational,
and the rectangle DF equal to the square of the rational A, is ratio-
nal; by the 21.p.10. BF will also be rational commensu. in lon-
gitude to BD. Therefore by the 12.p.10. BG will also be rational co-
mmens. in longitude to the same BD. And since BG, GE, have
been demonstrated commens. in power only, and BG
rational, GE will also be rational.  Therefore BG, GE are ratio-
nal commens. in power only: And therefore by the 37.
p.10. BE is binomial: of which the names BG, GE, are propor-
tional, and commens. to the names BD, CD, of the remainder BC. For
it has been demonstrated that as BD to CD, so BG to GE: and
therefore by permutation as BD to BG, so CD to GE: but
BD has been demonstrated commensurable in length to BG: there-
fore also CD will be commens. in length to GE, by the 10.p.10. It re-
mains therefore to prove that BE is a binomial of the same order as the
remainder BC: which will be [done] altogether as in the preceding.

                         SCHOLIUM.

If the ration. A is 4, and the remainder BC 9—√45, CD √45, and BD 9: the rect.
DF will be 16, and also CE 16: thus the side BF will be 12, and BE 4+√8
2
3
and consequently FE will be √8 2/3 + 2 2/3, and GE √8 2/3, FG 1 2/9,
BG 4: thus it is evident that BE is binomial in the same order as the re-
mainder BC, and that the names of these are proportional.

            THEOR. 91.    PROP. CXV.

If a rectangle is contained by a remainder, &
by a binomial, of which the names are propor-
tional & commensurable; the straight line
which can produce that rectangle is rational.

Let the rectangle AB be contained under the remainder AC, & the bi-
nomial CB, of which the names CD, DB may be proportional, &