EUCLID OF MEGARA, THE GREEK
PHILOSOPHER, THE TENTH BOOK OF THE
ELEMENTS OF GEOMETRY.

243

From Campanus                         Definitions

Quantities for which there is one common quantity
measuring them are called commensurable.
2    But those for which there is not one common quan-
tity measuring them are called incommensurable:
3    Lines commensurable in power are called those
whose square surfaces one common surface
measures. 4    Lines are called incommensurable in power, of which
the square surfaces are not measured by one common surface. Since
these things are so, it is clear that for any given line, many others are in-
commensurable, some in length only, some in length
and power. 5    And every line with which we reason, being given, is
called rational. 6    And lines commensurable with it are called rational.
7    But those incommensurable with it are called irrational or surds.
8    And every square surface about which by hypothesis we reason
is called rational. 9    And surfaces commensurable with it are called
rational. 10    But surfaces incommensurable with it are called
irrational or surds. 11    But the sides which make those squares
are called irrational.

Euclid from Zamberti                         Definitions

Commensurable magnitudes are called those which the same
measure will measure. 2    But incommensurable [are those]
which fall under the dimension of no common measure.
3    Straight lines are commensurable in power when the squares
from them are measured by the same area.
4    But incommensurable when no common area can be a measure
of those which are made into squares from them.
With these set forth it is shown that the proposed straight line, that is, from which
both cubits, and palms, and digits, and feet are taken as measures, itself has
straight lines in infinite multitude commensurable and incommensurable.
Commensurable indeed, either in power only, or in power and length
together. But incommensurable, either in length only, or in length
and power together. 6    Therefore the proposed straight
line itself is called rational. 7    And those commensurable with it either in length and
power, or in power only, [are called] rational. 8    But those incommensurable
in both, that is in length and power, are called irrational.
9    And that which is a square from the proposed straight line, [is] rational.
x 2     10    And