BOOK X.                                                                 207

BUT since in this book it had to be discussed by us about the num-
ber which Theon follows in the propositions of Euclid, as at
Propos. 13 we shall say, and since in all things we neglected the se-
quence of Campanus, as we showed at the beginning of the first book:
we took care that a double number in the margin opposite the propositions
should be set down, of which the upper would show the order of Theon,
but the lower the series of Campanus.
But if only one number is found in
the margin, then understand that there is no disagreement between Theon
and Campanus, as far as the numbering of the propositions is concerned.

THEOREM I.  PROPOSITION I.

TWO unequal magnitudes being set forth,
if from the greater there be taken more than the half; and from
that which remains, again there be taken more than
the half; and this be always done: there will at length
be left some magnitude which will be less than the lesser
proposed magnitude.

LET there be proposed two unequal magnitudes AB and
C, of which AB is the greater. I say that if from AB there be taken more than
the half, and from that which remains again more than the
half, and this be always done, there will at length be left some
magnitude which is less than C. For let C be multiplied so many times
until the magnitude made DE is greater than AB, so that DE is a
multiple of C, the least greater than AB. And DE being divided
into parts DF, FG, GE equal to C,
let there be taken from AB more than the
half AH, and from the remainder HB more
than the half HI, and let this always
be done until the parts of AB are equal in number to the parts of
DE. Let therefore the parts AH, HI, IB be now as many as are DF, FG,
GE. Since therefore DE is greater than AB; but from DE there has been taken
DF, less than the half, or at least the half if DE is
double of it; and from AB indeed more than the half AH: the remainder
FE will be greater than the remainder HB. (For since DE is greater than AB; if from
DE the half were taken away, and also from AB the half, then
the remainder from DE would also be greater than the remainder from AB. If therefore from DE there be taken
less than the half, or at least the half, and from AB more than
the half, the remainder from DE will be greater than the remainder from AB.) Again
since FE is greater than HB, and from FE there will be taken the half
FG, or at least less than the half if FE is greater than
double of C; but from HB more than the half HI: in the same
way the remainder GE will be greater than the remainder IB: and thus proceeding
we shall show at length the last part of DE, such as here is
GE, to be
GE, ma-