BOOK THE TENTH.                                                               26

numbers, will measure all magnitudes to which numbers are fitted; but it is fitting that the measure
have the same kind of quantity. Therefore unity takes to itself the same kind of quantity as the
quantity signified by number. Yet, even when the same kind of quantity has been taken, commensu-
ration can be present, and the same can be absent, not from a defect of the same kind as regards
quantity, but as regards measure.

NOTICE.

We vary the following corollary from the texture of Zamberti, as being another’s, so that we may
show that Euclid in this tenth [book] chiefly will teach the knowledge of incommensurable or uncer-
tain magnitudes, following the Greek exemplar: for those which he calls commensurable in power
only, he understands to be incommensurable in length; but the rest, indeed, in both ways, both in
power and in length, to be incommensurable, so that those which are compared with the set forth
[ones], all are understood to be incommensurable.

With these things set forth it is indicated that to the proposed straight line (whose quantity, namely,
is certain and determined) straight lines are compared in infinite multitude. Commensurable indeed,
in power only; but incommensurable in length and in power.

The undertaking which Euclid has taken up in this tenth [book] concerning incommensurable quan-
tities, he concludes to follow from the aforesaid: that to any proposed straight line, that is, of certain
and determined or known quantity, straight lines are compared in infinite multitude. But all are in-
commensurable, yet in two respects: some indeed commensurable, namely in power only, but in-
commensurable in length; others however incommensurable in both ways, namely in length and in
power. And thus all incommensurable to the same proposed [line] will be in two respects. But so
that we may conceive the true mind of Euclid, the proposed straight line is not only that which is
signified by a magnitude known to us, as it can be cubits, feet, palms, or digits (as Zamberti wished),
contrary to the Greek exemplar; but whatever [line] set forth by us, of whatever kind of measure it
may have been. For since it is free to divide any straight line into as many segments as [one wishes]
(from the ninth and sixteenth of the sixth [book]), we attribute these segments to a straight line
which will be incommensurable with a line of a foot or of a cubit; and therefore to this proposed
[line] of a foot or of a cubit it will be incommensurable, and likewise there can be given to the same
[proposed line] incommensurables either in length only, or in length and in power together. And by
this reasoning, from this proposed [line] all the species of incommensurables written in this tenth
[book] can be generated by the same way, just as also from a foot-long or cubit-long [line]: for
example, let the greatest straight line (by the thirty-sixth of the sixth [book]) be cut [so that] the
greater segment; that will be established to be incommensurable in length and in power with the
whole, from the sixth of the thirteenth of the tenth [book]. Yet, that greater segment having been
taken, into as many parts as we please we shall divide it, signified by a chosen number, from which
at length we produce infinite straight lines commensurable with this greater segment, in power only,
and incommensurable in length; and others incommensurable in length together with power, since
we have taken that segment as the proposed and certain [one]; but if we wish to find uncertain [ones],
by the same law we shall produce uncertain [ones] in respect of that segment, incommensurable to
it, as in a proposed cubit [line], either in power only, or in power and length together incommensu-
rable.

NOTICE.

Although these things are not properly handed down in their own place, nevertheless, judging them
worthy of notice, we have placed [them] here, to be understood more suitably later, lest those who
might err after Zamberti should take away this freedom of Geometry: that it is permitted to propose
only those straight measures observed by certain persons, as they decide the proposed [ones]; as if it
were forbidden that in diverse regions feet, or palms, or cubits, though in two ways incommensurable,
should be had; since indeed all are proposed straight lines. And therefore, upon these, to exhibit
proposed lengths of straight lines to which other incommensurables might be given: which would be
absurd. Therefore it will be permitted to propose whatever magnitudes of lines, so that incommensu-
rables may be compared to the same; and thus we shall say that the proposed [line] is that which is
proposed from the hypothesis.

Fifth definition.

Therefore the proposed straight line itself is called certain.

This proposed straight line Euclid calls certain or determined, to which, namely, the rest are com-
pared, so that they may be called certain, or incommensurable, or uncertain. But he called [it]
certain for this reason, because its quantity ought to be manifest to us, so that doubting nothing
about its quantity, we may truly profess it to be certain to us; and since the proposed quantity of it
will have been certain to us, more certain

Aa ij