THE TENTH ELEMENT.                                   5
FROM CLAVIUS.

THEREFORE, according to the opinion of Euclid, the square root of this number 20. or 1000. &c. Or what is the same, the straight line whose
square is 20. or 1000. &c. is called Rational, since in power it is commensurable with the Rational line (for indeed both the number
20. and 1000. are commensurable with the number of any square, as 16. 100. &c.) although in length it is incommensurable
with the same.
Therefore not a few Arithmeticians are deceived, who for that reason call it Irrational, because it cannot be expressed by number.

DEFIN.  VII.

But those incommensurable with this are called Irrational.

Since earlier Euclid has said that lines which are commensurable with a proposed rational line, either
in length and power together, or in power only, are rational: it is clear that those which
exist incommensurable with it in both ways are irrational.

DEFIN.  VIII.

And the square which is made from the proposed straight line is called Rational.

If from a rational line a square is described, it is necessary that it be rational. For
just as that line which is proposed is always of known magnitude (since it is taken and set as one at pleasure),
so the square described from it is always determinate and known and therefore rational.
But other surfaces which are compared with it, if perhaps with that square they have some area
as a common measure, are called Commensurable; if they do not have it, they ought to be judged Incommensurable.

DEFIN.  IX.

And those commensurable with this indeed are Rational.

If the proposed square is Rational, all other squares which are commensurable
with it will be Rational. For just as lines which are commensurable with a proposed rational line,
either in length and power together, or in power only, are Rational: so surfaces
and squares which are commensurable with that surface are Rational.
Which is true not only as far as squares, but also as far as the other
geometrical figures which among themselves have some area as a common measure.

FROM CLAVIUS.

But since the potent lines themselves are spaces commensurable with the square of the Rational proposed line, they are at least
commensurable in power with the Rational line from the 3rd definition; it is evident that they also are to be called, according to defin. 6, Rational.

DEFIN.  X.

But those incommensurable with this are called Irrational.

FROM CLAVIUS.

In no other way are plane surfaces incommensurable with the square described from a Rational line called Irrational, than lines which
are altogether incommensurable with a proposed Rational line have been called Irrational.

DEFIN.  XI.

And straight lines which can themselves [be] Irrational: if indeed those squares are, the same in breadth-
B