E L E M E N T.                                                                 403

5  This being so, it is evident that for any straight line
proposed, one will find infinitely many straight lines commensura-
ble, and infinitely many incommensurable: some in length and
power, the others in power only. Now this straight line
proposed, is called rational.

that is to say that when one proposes some straight line of known and deter-
mined magnitude, it is called rational, because it is according to it that we reason: and
applying numbers to such lines, we will always set them by one of these absolute numbers,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, etc.

6  And the straight lines commensurable with this rational
line, whether in length and power, or in power only,
are also called rational.

7  But the lines incommensurable with this rational line,
are called irrational.

if comparing some straight line to the line taken as rational, and upon
which we reason, it is found commensurable with that rational one, whether in length,
or power, or power only, such a line is also rational; but if it
is incommensurable with that proposed rational line, both in length and in power,
this said line is called irrational.

8  The square described on a proposed rational line, is
called rational.

Just as that line, which is known and determined of a certain quantity,
is called rational; so also the square described on that line, is called rational,
because it is certain and known: and the surfaces compared to that square, are
also called rational, or else irrational, according as they are found commensura-
ble or incommensurable with that rational square, as is said in the two definitions
following.

9  The figures commensurable with this rational square, are
also rational.

10  But those which are incommensurable with it, are irratio-
nal and surd.

11  And the straight lines which can [produce] those irrational
figures, are irrational and surd.

now a straight line is said to be able [to produce] a figure, when the square described on it is
EEc ij