188  
TENTH

the three lines FH, EH, CH, will be continually pro-
portional in the ratio of FE to EC, or BD to DG: & by
22.p.6.& 10.p.10. as the square of BD is commensur. with the
square of DC, (for those squares are commensur. since
BD,DC are the terms of the binomial BC) so that the square of
EH, will be commensur. with the square of CH: & by the corol. of
20.p.6. & 10.p.10. CH will be commens. in length with the third
proportional FH, & by 16.p.10. CH & CF will be
commens. in length. And inasmuch as the rectangle DF is ra-
tional (being equal to the square of the rational line A) & DC,
a rational line: CF will also be a rational line commensur. in
length with CD, by 21.p.10. And CH will be a rational line co-
mmens. in length with CD, by 12.p.10. & by 10.p.10. as
CD & DB are rational lines commens. in power only,
so also CH, EH, will be rational lines commens. in power
only: & therefore by 74.p.10. CE will be a residual: of which
the terms EH, CH, are proportional, & commens. with the terms
BD,DC, of the binomial BC: For it has been shown that as
BD is to DG, so EH to CH; & therefore by alternation as
BD will be to EH; so DC to CH. But DC, CH have been
shown commens. in length by 10.p.10. BD, EH, will
therefore also be commens. in length.

It remains then to prove that the residual is of the same order as
the binomial: Now the terms of the one being proportional, & co-
mmensurab. with the terms of the other: by 15.p.10. as the greater
term of the binomial can exceed the lesser by the square
of a line which will be commensurable with it, or incommens. in
length: the greater term of the residual can exceed by the same.
And if the greater term of the binomial is commensurable
in length with the rational: so also will be the greater of the residual
by 12.p.10. & they will be first binomial, & first residual.
If the lesser term of the binomial is commens. in length
with the rational; so also will be the lesser of the residual; & they will be
second binomial & residual. If neither the one nor the other term of the
binomial is commens. with the rational; similarly neither the one nor the
other term of the residual will be commens. with the same rational:
And they will be third binomial, & third residual: & so of the others.

SCHOLIUM.

If the rational A is 8, the binomial BC 9 + √45. such that BD is
9, & CD √45: the square of A being applied on BC, the other side of
[illegible]