BOOK  TEN.                                                                     97

[uncertain: tionem], nevertheless they have that relation or respect which is called a ratio between quantities of the same
kind, by the third definition of the fifth [book], as we said more fully in the preface. Wherefore hereafter, since every irra-
tional or rational [magnitude], although the worn-out denomination, undeservedly attributed by the theorems of this tenth book
(to lines and planes), we shall remove, and we shall convert that word rational or irrational into certain or uncer-
tain (their proper denomination). We have done this so that we may express, by a proper term, the true signification of these quantities
as determined or undetermined. Moreover, so that we may not omit the improper denominations (rational & irrational),
for if these were read, we should err arbitrarily. Therefore, of all the most [uncertain: ſiſſimice] incommensurables we shall be able to call any one certain,
since it has been proposed to us for this cause, that by comparing the others with it we may call them certain or uncertain;
for hypothetically the proposed line denominates it certain, as the fifth definition says, which calls the
proposed [one] certain, because it has been proposed.

                         Definition eighth.

And that which is a square on the proposed straight line is certain.

                         Definition ninth.

And those which are commensurable with it, [are] certain.

                         Definition tenth.

But those which are incommensurable with it are called uncertain.

Where Euclid has set forth the nature of the first kind of quantities (which is length or line) for the sake of the
second kind of the same genus of quantity, that is, surface, which contains length and breadth.
And thus the square which is made from the proposed straight line (in which that which was supposed certain) is
therefore certain, because it arises from a certain straight line multiplying itself (as in numbers).
And further he commands that squares, area, surface, or any plane whatever, if they are commensurable with this
certain square, are likewise to be called certain. For since we have said sufficiently and more than enough that the origin of commensuration proceeds from numbers,
because unity measures all numbers. Moreover, that numbers are not quantities of themselves, but are adaptable to quantities.
If a number is applied to some quantity, we shall understand it to be cut into so many equal parts as there are units in that number.
For if those units measure another quantity, those magnitudes, even by repetition, will be commensurable (from the first definition of this [book]).
Therefore if two lines are equal, they receive an equal multitude of units, and the units of them.
And thus the square contained under them consists of units, taking its origin from the equal units of those lines.
Moreover, following the nature of that plane, namely squares, since they are contained under equal units.
Therefore if those straight lines, being equal (that is, those taken as certain), receive a square, that [square] will therefore be certain,
because it can be generated from the same units of the proposed line. But because any planes commensurable with the same square
can be measured by the same measure, this measure is the units measuring each plane, [and] certain; and therefore those planes which
are composed from the same units, by whatever different multitude, we shall call commensurable with one another,
since the same units are applied to them. But if to the proposed line another is compared, commensurable in power
only, but by no means in length, then by surfaces, the compared length (taken separately) is uncertain, but the power certain.
Wherefore we shall call the denomination of the line certain: for commensuration of the power or of the length suffices to acquire a certain denomination.
But if there is proposed a certain square or plane, and another surface is compared, whose units can measure the square,
it will be clear that those units are foreign to those which composed the same square surface.
And therefore the surface compared to the square, being composed from foreign units, is incommensurable.
For if they were commensurable, the same unit would measure both of them. Wherefore deservedly we shall call this surface
(incommensurable with the certain one) uncertain, because the units proposed as certain cannot determine it or make it certain.
For as we said, any denomination of the uncertain depends on the relation to the proposed certain [one],
whatever it may be in species or be numbered by any quantity of units. But [uncertain: CMutat] however

Aa ij