Tenth

¶ The Tenth Book of Euclid’s Elements, and the most diffe-
cult, from the tradition of Theon, translated by Barthol-
omew Zamberti the Venetian.

¶ First Definition.
Commensurable magnitudes are said to be: those
which the same measure measures.

¶ Second Definition.
¶ But incommensurable [magnitudes]: which fall under no
dimension of a common measure,

¶ Third Definition.
¶ Straight lines commensurable in power are: those whose
squares □□ are measured by the same area.

¶ Fourth Definition.
¶ But incommensurable: when the squares from them are measured by no area
with a common measure.

¶ With these set forth it is indicated: that the proposed straight line is that by which: and cubits: and
palms: and digits and feet are taken as measures. There are straight lines in
infinite multitude: commensurable and incommensurable: some indeed in length
and power: but others in power only. Therefore the proposed straight line itself is called
rational: and those commensurable with it: both in length and
power: and in power only, [are called] rational. But those incommensurable in
both ways: that is in length and power, are called irrational. And that which
is the square on the proposed straight line [is] rational: and those commensurable
with it [are] rational: and that which is on an incommensurable [line are] irrational: and those commensurable
with it [are] irrational: are said: and the powers themselves, whether their squares are their sides
or some other straight lines describing squares equal to them □□, are called irrational.

¶ First Theorem, first proposition.
¶ With two unequal magnitudes set out: if from the greater
there be taken more than the half: and from what is left
more than the half: and if this be done always: there will be left some
magnitude less than the lesser magnitude set out.

¶ Let there be two unequal magnitudes, ab, c, of which the greater is ab. I say that if
from ab there be taken more than the half: and from the remainder more than the half: and if this
be done always: there will be left some magnitude less than the lesser magnitude set out,
c. Therefore c multiplied will be greater than ab. Let it be multiplied and let de be a multiple of
c: greater than ab. And let de be divided into equals to c, that is
df, fg, ge. And let there be taken from ab more than the half, bh, and from ah more than the
half, that is hk. And thus always from each: from ab there are equal divisions. Let there be
as many as the divisions which are in de: therefore let ak, kh, and hb be
equal divisions existing in number to df, fg, and ge. And since de is greater than
ab, there will be taken from de less than the half, that is eg, from

L