THE TENTH ELEMENT.                                                                 7

THESE axioms, as they pertain to numbers, have been set forth by us in the last three
pronunciations of Book 7. Wherefore, since the same reasoning holds in magnitudes, there is
no reason that we should uselessly repeat their demonstrations here, especially since they can
be transferred hither word for word; only the word “number” being changed into the word
“magnitude”.

Theorem I.     Proposition 1.

TWO unequal magnitudes being proposed, if from the greater there be taken away more
than the half, and from that which remains there be again taken away more than the half,
and this be always done: there will at length be left some magnitude which will be less than
the proposed lesser magnitude.

c        d        f        i
a        e   z    b

LET there be set forth two unequal magnitudes a b, and c d, of which a b is the greater,
but c d the lesser. I say that if from a b there be taken away more than the half, namely a e,
and from the remainder again more than the half, namely e z, and this be always done, there
will at length be left some magnitude which is less than c d.
  For let c d be multiplied so many times until the magnitude made from that multiplication
exceed the magnitude a b; and let that magnitude be c i, which therefore is a multiple of c d,
the nearest greater than a b.
  Then let c i be divided into parts equal to c d, and let those parts be c d, d f, f i; and let
there be taken away from a b more than the half, a e; and from the remainder e b again more
than the half, e z; and let this be done until the parts of the line a b are equal in number to
the parts of c i.
  Since therefore c i is greater than a b, and from c i there has been taken away c d, less than
its half (or certainly the half if c i is double of c d). But from a b there has been taken away
a e, greater than its half; the remainder d i will be greater than the remainder e b. For since
c i is greater than a b, if from c i the half had been taken away, and from a b the half also
were taken away, the remainders would not be equal, but one would be greater than the other,
namely the remainder from c i greater than the remainder from a b.
  Therefore, taking away from c i less than the half (or certainly the half), and from a b more
than the half, the remainder from c i will be greater than the remainder from a b.
  Next, since d i is greater than e b, and if from d i there be taken away the half of it, d f (or
certainly less than the half), and from e b there be taken away e z, greater than the half, in the
same way the remainder f i will be greater than the remainder z b. And thus proceeding it is
easy to demonstrate that the last part of c i, namely f i, is greater than the last part of a b,
namely z b.
  But f i, the last part of the straight line c i, is equal to c d. Therefore the straight line c d is
greater than z b, the last part of a b.
  Wherefore, by that subtraction there has been left the remainder z b, which is less than c d,
which was to be shown.

SCHOLIUM FROM CLAVIUS.

MORE clearly than light, from the demonstration of this Theorem it appears that two unequal quantities proposed ought to be such that the
less, when multiplied, can at length exceed the greater: which is to be noted with respect to Proposition 16 of Book 3, when we shall treat of the
angle of contact against Lactantius Ptolemy.