BOOK

[diagram labels:]
f  a  a  g
16        24
8  c      k  124
4  b      m  b  62
2  l      e  31
1
p         q

[main text:]
successive proportionals: let it be shown therefore from the equals e.h. that it is equal to m.h. and the remainder h.n.
which will thus be equal: likewise from f.g. let it be shown to be equal, that f.n. will be equal, and thus the premised n
ḡ. that the aggregate from e.h. and k. and l.iſ3 and f.n. when it is equal. and that the aggregate
from a. and b. and c. and d. and the unit. likewise all f.g.e as much as the aggregate from all these
ſc3.a.b.c.d. and the unit and those e.h. from which it is manifest that the numbered are that
ſc3.ſ.g.c. indeed sm.h. and b.g.n.k.cd from the first part. 20. of the fifth, it is helped that
proportionality wherever it shall have been. for let it be as d.a. to d.c. so n. to e. and u. to d.a.b.
likewise k. to e.p by equal proportionality that from c.i.h. and from b.i. it is necessary to
come. therefore that which two had led d.i.e.li therefore no other from these numbered. therefore
by definition of a perfect number. But if that which is no other from it numbered thus. for if indeed
this were possible. that it number even sum q. and it will be by 35. of the seventh, as e. the numbered of the other
of them posits that it number p. and that by the second part. 20. of the seventh, and that to d. so u. to p. it is read
as q. numbered d. as much as e.u. that following the unit it is first. it will be binary. it will be by
3. of this either a. or b. or c. whatever or this it shall have been it will be p. or l. or k. or h. if
for q. shall have been a. how much it will be p. it will be l. which is p. if it shall have been b. it will be k. but if c. p. which will be b
therefore p is not diverse from those as numbered it can be found therefore that f.g. is a perfect number
which was to be demonstrated.     Here ends the Ninth book, the Tenth book begins.

Quantities which have one common quantity, those
numbers are called commensurable. but those which do not have
one common quantity, those numbers are called incommensurable.
Lines and powers commensurable are said
when the square surfaces one common surface numbers.
Lines incommensurable in power
are said when the square surfaces do not number
one common surface: and since thus it is manifest
that of which lines usually many others are incommensurable,
some in length: some in length and power.
Every line however which we can express by reckoning is called rational.
Lines which communicate with it are called rational. but those which do not communicate
are called irrational or mute. Every square surface moreover of which by
hypothesis we can express by reckoning is called rational. Surfaces moreover which communicate with it
are called rational. but those incommensurable with the surface
are called irrational or mute. but the sides which those squares
can [be] are called rational. Any quantity can so many times be
multiplied that it exceeds any quantity of the same kind that is set.

Proposition.     1.

[diagram labels:]
d  e  f  k  l  m
a     b     c  b  c
g     h

If two unequal quantities are set out, to subtract the greater by half from the greater; and that from the remainder to subtract
again more than half in the same way: it is necessary that at last
a quantity less than the lesser that was set out is left.
Let there be two unequal quantities a. and b.c.b.c. the greater. I say that so many times more than half can be
subtracted from a.b.c. or from its remainder that it is necessary that a remainder less than b.c is left.
For let a be multiplied as many times as it exceeds b.c, and let it be its multiple d.e. Let b.c of
a.b.c be subtracted more than half, which is b.g. and likewise from the remainder which is e.g.e more than half
which is g.h. let this also be done so many times until b. is left as many times as
[illegible]