244        ARITHMET.  ELEMENT.  OF EUCLID

10  And those which are commensurable with this, (are called) rational.
(Those) incommensurable, are called irrational.  12  And of these (if the sides be squares
but if not, by some other rectilineal (figure), the powers being equal) and the squares
described on them, let them be called irrational.

Eucl. from Camp.                                   Proposition  1

If, two unequal quantities being proposed, a quantity greater than the half
be taken away from the greater, and again from the remainder a quantity greater than the half
be taken away, and thereafter in the same manner, it is necessary that at length,
a quantity less than the lesser proposed quantity be left.

CAMPANUS  Let there be two unequal quantities a and b, b being the greater: I say that so many times
a quantity greater than the half can be taken away from b, that it will be necessary that the remaining
quantity be less than a. For let a be multiplied so many times until it exceed b, and let its multiple be d e f,
greater than b c. Let there then be taken away from b c a quantity greater than the half, which be b d,
and again from the remainder which is g e, a quantity greater than the half, which be g h; and let this also be done
so many times, until b c be divided into as many parts as many times as a is contained in d e f.
I say then that the last remainder u, which is h c, will be less than a. For let h c be multiplied
as many times as a is multiplied in d e f, and let its multiple be k l m. Therefore each one of the quantities k, l, m
is equal to h c; it follows that k also is less than b g, and l less than g h; but since m is equal to h c,
k l m will by conception be less than b c, therefore less than d e f. And since therefore d e f is to a as k l m to h c,
and d e f is greater than k l m, it follows by the 4. of the fifth, that a is greater than h c, which is the thing proposed.
And the same follows, if from the greater the half be taken away and again from the remainder the half,
and this be done so many times until the greater be divided into as many parts as the lesser is contained
in any of its multiples, the greater of the proposed quantities being exceeded by as much as you please.

CAMPANUS’ note,  But it must be observed, that this proposition seems to contradict the fifteenth of the third,
proposing that an angle of contingence is less than any angle contained by two straight lines. For if any rectilineal angle
be set out, if from it a quantity greater than the half be taken away, and again from the remainder a quantity greater than the half, it seems
necessary that this can be done so many times until a rectilineal angle less than an angle of contingence be left, the opposite of which the third syllogizes.
But these are not univocal angles, for the curved and the straight are not simply of the same genus. Moreover neither is an angle of contingence
to be taken so many times, that it exceed any rectilineal (angle), which is necessary (as is clear from the foregoing demonstration) for this, that the consequent
follow from the antecedent. It is plain therefore that also any rectilineal angle is greater than infinitely many
angles of contingence.

Eucl. from Zamb.                 Theorem  1        Proposition  1

If two unequal magnitudes be set out, if from the greater there be taken away
more than the half, and from that which is left more than the half,
and this be always done, there is left some magnitude
less than the lesser magnitude set out.

THEON from Zamb.  Let there be two unequal magnitudes α and β, of which the greater is α. I say that
if from α there be taken away more than the half, and from the remainder more than the half, and this be always done,
there will be left some magnitude less than the lesser magnitude set out. And since β is less, therefore γ,
multiplied, will at length be greater than β. Let therefore δ be multiplied, and of γ indeed a multiple
greater than β. Let α be divided into equals to γ, so many that there be taken away from α β,
more than the half, e, and γ from α, more than the half, that is, γ; and let this be always done, until
the divisions in α which are equal be in multitude to those which are in δ by divisions; and let there be therefore
κ, n, θ, and β, divisions, being equal in multitude to δ, and β; and since δ is greater
than β, and that which is taken away from α is less than the half, that is, γ, but from α more
than the half e, and the remainder therefore α, is greater than the remainder β, a. And since δ is greater than α,
and from α the half, that is, ε, is taken away, but from α more than the half, that is, η, the remainder therefore