256  THE TENTH ELEMENT  Book 10.

COMMON SENTENCES.

1  A magnitude measuring as many magnitudes as you please,
doth also measure the magnitude compounded of them.

2  A magnitude which measureth any magnitude whatsoever, doth
in like manner, measure every other magnitude, which that
magnitude doth measure.

3  A magnitude measuring a whole magnitude, and the part cut
off there-from, doth also measure the rest.

PRO-


Book 10.  OF EUCLID.  257

PROPOSITIONS,
PROBLEMS, & THEOREMS.

PROPOSITION I.  THEOREM I.

A|------H  I------|B
C|------
      F   G   E
D|----------------

Two unequal magnitudes being
proposed, AB, and C, if from the
greatest AB; there be cut off more
than the half, and of the rest again,
more than the half; and if that be done always so, in continuing,
there will remain in the end some magnitude less than the least
magnitude C proposed.

Demonstration  For let C be multiplied so many times, as that the product
may exceed A B, and let D E be the product, so as that
D E may be a multiple of C, and next greater than A B, and let D E be
divided according to the parts D F, F G, G E, each equal to C, and from
A B, let there be cut off more than the half A H, and of the rest H B, also
more than the half H I, and so always until the parts of A B, may be e-
qual in number to those of D E. Let the parts then A H, H I, I B, be as
many in number, as D F, F G, G E, so that forasmuch as D E is greater than
A B, and that from D E there be taken D F, less than the half, (or the
half, if D E were only double to C,) and from A B more than the half
A H, the rest E shall be greater than the rest H B.
Again, E being greater than H B, if from E be taken the half F G,
(or less than the half; if E were greater than the double of C:) but
from H B, more than the half H I, the rest G E shall be in like manner grea-
ter than the rest I B; but G E is equal to C, therefore C shall be also grea-
ter than I B, the last part of A B: Therefore, of A B there will remain a
magnitude less than C. The same will happen, if you take away the half
of A H, and from the rest H B, the half H I, for in like manner, I B the
rest shall be less than G E, that is to say, than C. Therefore, Two, &c.
Which was to be demonstrated.

L1  PROP.