256  THE TENTH ELEMENT  Lib. 10.

COMMON SENTENCES.

1  A magnitude meaſuring as many magnitudes as you pleaſe,
doth alſo meaſure the magnitude compounded of them.

2  A magnitude which meaſureth any magnitude whatſoever, doth
in like manner, meaſure every other magnitude , which that
magnitude doth meaſure.

3  A magnitude meaſuring a whole magnitude, and the part cut
off there-from, doth alſo meaſure the reſt.

PRO-


Lib. 10.  OF EUCLIDE.  257

PROPOSITIONS,
PROBLEMES, & THEOREMES.

PROPOSITION I.  THEOREM I.

A|------H  I------|B
C|------
      F   G   E
D|----------------

Two unequal magnitudes being
propoſed, AB, and C, if from the
greateſt AB; there be cut off more
then the halfe, and of the reſt again,
more than the halfe; and if that be done alwayes ſo, in continuing,
there will remain in the end ſome magnitude leſſe then the leaſt
magnitude C propoſed.

Demonſtration  FOr let C be multiplyed ſo many times , as that the product
may exceed A B , and let D E be the product , ſo as that
D E may be multiple of C , and next greater then A B , and let D E be
divided according to the parts D F, F G, G E, each equal to C, and from
A B, let there be cut off more then the half A H , and of the reſt H B , alſo
more then the half H I , and ſo alwayes until the parts of A B , may be e-
qual in number to thoſe of D E , Let the parts then A H, H I, I B, be as
many in number , as D F, F G, G E, ſo that forafmuch as D E is greater then
A B , and that from D E there be taken D F , leſſe then the halfe, (or the
halfe, if D E were onely double to C,) and from A B more then the halfe
A H, the reſt E ſhall be greater then the reſt H B.
Again, E being greater then H B, if from E be taken the halfe F G,
(or leſſe then the halfe ; if E were greater then the double of C :) but
from H B, more then the half H I, the reſt G E ſhall be in like manner grea-
ter then the reſt I B; but G E is equal to C, therefore C ſhall be alſo grea-
ter then I B, the laſt part of A B : Therefore, of A B there will remain a
magnitude leſſe then C. The ſame will happen, if you take away the halfe
of A H, and from the reſt H B , the halfe H I, for in like manner, I B the
reſt ſhall be leſſe then G E, that is to ſay, then C. Therefore, Two, &c.
Which was to be demonſtrated.

L1  PROP.