BOOK  TEN.                                                                     97

[uncertain: tionem], nevertheless they have that relation or respect which is called ratio between quantities of the same
kind, in the third definition of the fifth, as we said more fully in the preface. Wherefore hereafter, since every irratio-
nal [is called] either rational, although the worn name taken from the theorems of this tenth book (wrongly attributed to
lines and planes) we shall maintain, and we shall convert the word rational or irrational into certain or uncer-
tain (their proper denomination), we [do so] in order that we may express by a proper word the true signification of these quantities
as determined or undetermined. Moreover, in order that we may remove the use of improper denominations (rational & irrational),
we think this will be acceptable to those who read these things. Therefore, of all incommensurables we shall be able to call any one certain,
since it has been proposed to us for this cause, that by comparing the rest we may call them certain or uncertain;
for the hypothesis denominates the proposed line as certain, as the fifth definition says, which calls the
proposed [one] certain, because it has been proposed.

Eighth Definition.

And that which is the square on the proposed straight line [is] certain.

Ninth Definition.

And those which are commensurable with it [are] certain.

Tenth Definition.

But those which are incommensurable with it are called uncertain.

Here Euclid explains the nature of quantities of the first kind (which is length or line) with respect to the
second, on account of the kind of the same quantity, that is, to surface, which contains length and breadth.
And therefore the square which is made from the proposed straight line (in which that which was supposed certain) is
therefore certain, because it arises from a certain straight line multiplying itself (as in numbers).
And further, he commands that those squares, areas, surfaces, or whatever planes are commensurable with this
certain square, be similarly called certain. For since we have said sufficiently and more than enough that the origin of commensuration has proceeded from numbers,
because unity measures all numbers. Moreover, that numbers are not quantities of themselves, but adaptable to
quantities. If a number is applied to some quantity, we understand it to be cut into so many equal parts
as there are units in that number. For if those units measure another quantity,
those magnitudes will be commensurable (from the first definition of this) by whatever repetition.
Therefore if two lines are equal, equal units and the multitude of their units will be received.
And thus the square contained by them consists of units, taking its origin from the equal units of those lines.
Moreover, following the nature of that plane, namely squares, since they are contained under equal units.
Therefore if those straight lines, being equal (that is, those single certain [ones] taken), receive a square,
that [square] will therefore be certain, because it can be generated from the same units of the proposed line.
But because any planes commensurable with the same square can be measured by the same measure,
this measure will know units from each plane a certain number, and therefore those planes which
are composed from the same units, though by any different multitude, we shall call commensurable with one another,
since the same units are applied to them. But if to the proposed line another is compared, in power
commensurable only, but in length by no means, by the comparison of surfaces, the length
(taken separately) is uncertain, but the power certain. Wherefore we shall call the denomination of the line certain:
for commensuration either of the power or of the length suffices to acquire a certain denomination.
But if to the proposed certain square or plane another surface is compared, whose
units can measure the square itself, it will be clear that those units are foreign to those which
composed the same square surface. And therefore the surface compared to the square, composed from foreign
units, is commensurable. For if they were commensurable, the same unit
would measure each of them. Wherefore deservedly we shall call this surface (incommensurable with the certain one)
uncertain, because the units of the proposed certain [one] cannot determine it or make it certain.
For as we say, any denomination of the uncertain depends on the relation to the proposed certain [one],
whatever it may be in species or be numbered by any quantity of unit. But the changed [things] however

Aa ij