TENTH BOOK.                                                423

V  I  I.

All those straight lines, then, which are incommen-
surable with this one, are called Irrational.

Euclid divides the infinite multitude of straight lines into three kinds, because
there are found, as it were by chance, in Nature, cases that concern their commen-
surability and incommensurability; that is, either the straight lines are commensurable in
length, and in this case they are necessarily commensurable also in
power, as will be shown in its place; or they are not commensurable in power,
and in this other case necessarily they are not commensurable in
length either, as likewise will be shown in this tenth Element; or they are not
commensurable in length, but they are commensurable in power. If
they are not commensurable in power (for which reason, as has been said, they are not
commensurable in length either) the straight lines, according to this kind,
are called Irrational. If the straight lines are commensurable in length (because
they are also commensurable in power) according to this other kind, they are called
Rational. And finally, when the straight lines are not commensurable in
length, but are commensurable in power, they are likewise called Ratio-
nal. Therefore two kinds of rational straight lines are considered in Nature,
and only one of irrational; that is. Those straight lines, of which, with respect to
some common measure, the parts can be expressed, which Euclid calls
commensurable in length, constitute the first kind of rational straight lines.
Those straight lines then, of which, with respect to some commu-
on measure, the parts cannot be expressed, for which reason they are called incommen-
surable, either are not commensurable in power; if they are commensura-
ble in power, that is, if of their powers, with respect to some
common measure, the parts can be expressed, these constitute the other kind of straight
lines, which likewise are called Rational. And if they are not commensurable
in power either, that is, if neither in length nor in power the parts can be expressed
with respect to some common measure, those constitute the third
kind, and are called Irrational. And from here it is gathered that any straight line,
considered alone, without comparison to another straight line, is neither
rational nor irrational: but if it is compared to some other straight
line, then, according to the conditions explained above, either it
will be rational, or irrational. For example, the straight line AB,
considered alone, without another comparison, is neither ratio-
nal nor irrational; but compared to some other straight
line C, if the straight line C measures exactly the straight line AB, dividing
AB into parts equal to the straight line C, we shall come to know
how many parts in AB are equal to C; and thus we can ex-
press the multitude of parts that are in AB equal
to the straight line C; and in such case the straight line AB is commensurable
in length with respect to the measure C, that is, the straight line AB
is that of which the parts can be expressed with respect
to the measure C; and in this case the straight line AB
is called rational. But if the straight line C does not measure
exactly the straight line AB, but if some straight line D is found, the

E
A  C

which