EUCLID. GEOM. 5

and in power, but some only in power, etc. Which indeed
by no means follows from what has been said, but will be demonstrated in what
follows, as we said.
  But that proposed LINE, by reference to which others are
commensurable or incommensurable, is called by the Greeks
ῥητὴ, and by the Latins Rational; because it is always set down
as certain and known, whereas others, when compared with it, are not always
known, although each, taken separately, exists certainly
also, and is known; it can be divided into equal parts in whatever place.

VI.

AND those commensurable with it either in length
and power, or in power only, [are] Ra-
tional.

IT TEACHES that other lines, commensurable with that which is called Rational
in whatever way, are also called Rational: not
indeed by position, as that [one]; but because when compared with it they are found
commensurable with it in length and power, or in
power only.
  THUS ALSO, according to the opinion of Euclid, the square root of this
number 20, or 100, etc. Or what is the same, the straight line
whose square is 20, or 100, etc. is called Rational; since
in power it is commensurable with the Rational line, although in length
it is incommensurable with it. Therefore not a few Arith-
meticians are deceived, who call it Irrational, because it
cannot be expressed by a number.

VII.

BUT those incommensurable with THIS [one], let them be
called Irra-
tional.

SINCE in the preceding definition Euclid [has said] those lines
which in length and power, or which in power only, are
incommensurable with the proposed straight Rational line, he called Rationa-
l;

BOOK X. 5

l; it is clear that here he calls those Irrational which are
incommensurable with the proposed straight Rational [line] in all
ways, namely in length and power, but not in length
only. From which it is also manifest that the square root
of this number 20, or 1000, etc. or (what is the same) the
line whose square is 20, or 1000, etc. cannot be called
Irrational, since it is not in length and power, but in
length only, incommensurable with the proposed Rational line.

VIII.

AND the square, which is from the proposed
straight [line], let it be called Rational.

JUST AS that line which is set down as certain and
known is called Rational: so also the square described on it
is called Rational, because it too is certain and known,
by comparison; other surfaces, [when compared] with it, are called commensurable [or]
incommensurable.

IX.

AND those commensurable with THIS indeed, Ra-
tional.

ALL plane surfaces commensurable with the square on the proposed Rational line
are called Rational; not indeed
by position, as that [one]; but because when compared with it they are found
either commensurable with it, or incommensurable: just as
also lines which are in any way commensurable with the Rational line
are called Rational.
  BUT since lines having a square sufficiently commensurable
with the square of the proposed Rational line are at least
commensurable in power with the Rational line, from the 3rd
definition it is clear, that these too are to be
called according to definition 6 Ra-
tional.

WITH THIS