EUCL. ELEMENT. GEO.

thus it becomes the aforesaid innate genius itself, which produces an absurdity, when we have said
that the smallest part of number is the unit, and subject to no section. This expression of quantity
which requires the section of a unit is deprived of any denomination, because a unit does not admit
section. Wherefore that quantity, deprived of denomination, compared to the proposed one, admits
no denomination of ratio. But indeed it will have a ratio to it, since they are magnitudes of the same
kind as to quantity, though not as to commensuration. Yet it is deprived of every denomination,
which can be expressed only by numbers, that it may enjoy the usefulness of discreteness. But since
of these magnitudes, whose quantity one falls into a section of the unit of the other, the species are
infinite, and the ways of cutting the unit infinite: we shall hereafter say that an infinity can be given,
add the species of incommensurables, although between themselves the quantities of any one species
are commensurable with one another. Yet all whose denomination can express the section of a unit
are wholly deprived of that word by which existing things are denominated, as if they were to be
called not existing things, but rather hypotheses. From these diverse sections of units arise numbers
which are called surds, or irrationals, or algebraic, and they are roots of numbers having no [root].
Wherefore although they ought rather to be called hypothetical than essential. Nevertheless their
feigned hypotheses contribute not a little to explaining difficult things. Therefore we shall say that
those feigned or hypothetical [things], for expressing incommensurables infinite in number, (if indeed
that is called expressing) are more ready. Since it is shown that the one has taken origin from these,
and these likewise from those. But since we have now said that the unit is cut by incommensurables,
and earlier among numbers that the quantity denoted by it is cut, we shall not think it superfluous
to discern what difference there is between these. We said that the quantity signified by the unit is
cut infinitely, into parts, equal [to] those expressed by infinite numbers, composing that precise
quantity. And then at last the unit is not cut, but changed into other units, of which always the
smallest of any would be one. Therefore the nature of the unit of this number is not cut, but the
quantity signified by the unit. But when we now say the unit is cut, the quantity signified by the
unit is cut into those parts which by no denomination of number restore the whole quantity of the
unit: because into the section of one unit, the discrete divisions made by infinite quaternary numbers
you will never fall, but when examined infinitely, it is found always to have fallen outside that
commensuration of units (so to speak), which can happen by infinites, as we shall see hereafter.
Wherefore we say that this quantity is incommensurable with the quantity expressed by prior
numbers, because it must be expressed by units which are wholly incommensurable with the prior
units. And therefore the numbers of this [quantity] will always be incommensurable with the numbers
of that. Since individual numbers follow the nature of their units. Therefore we shall call magnitudes
incommensurable, from the privation of a common measure, not having the same kind of measure.
Not otherwise than those lacking the same kind of quantity, irrationals are rightly said, from the
privation of ratio, as is provided in the third and fifth definition.

Third Definition.

Straight lines are commensurable in power, when the squares from them
are measured by the same area.

Fourth Definition.

But they are incommensurable, when no area can be a common measure
of the squares which are from them.

Since Euclid calls the power of a line the square of that line, or the same surface equal to this
square, he says therefore: that straight lines are commensurable in power (that is, that the squares
of straight lines, or surfaces equal to them, are commensurable) when the same area constitutes each
exactly by its repetition, as we said in the first definition concerning magnitudes in general. But here
he says that any quantity is measured by the same kind of quantity, and therefore that measure is
expressed by numbers, so that at length between them there falls a denomination of ratio, expressed
by the power of numbers: but incommensurables, by the opposite word, are to be explained by
privation, when no area can be given as a common measure between their squares. To these
definitions we have added what we said earlier in general, following that, in the first definition of the
seventh [book], namely that the unit assumes that form of quantity when number is to be applied.
For if number be adapted to a line, the individual units have length only. But if to a surface, length
and breadth, and if to a solid, that they have three dimensions, long, broad, and high. For since it
measures them all
nume