204            EUCLID. GEOM.
VI.
And those commensurable with it either in length & power,
or in power only, [are called] Rational.
He teaches that other lines, which are in any way commensu-
rable with that which is called Rational, are also to be called Rational,
not indeed by position, as that [line is], but because, when compared
with it, they are found commensurable with it either in length & power,
or in power only.
Therefore, according to the opinion of Euclid, the square root of this number
20. or 1000. &c. Or what is the same, the straight line whose square
is 20. or 1000. &c. is called Rational; since in power it is commen-
surable with the Rational line; (for the number 20. as well as
1000. is commensurable with any square number, as 16. 100. &c.)
although in length it is incommensurable with the same. Therefore
not a few arithmeticians are deceived, who for that reason call it Irrational,
because it cannot be expressed by number.

VII.
But those incommensurable with this, are called
Irrational.
Since in the preceding definition Euclid called those lines Rational
which are commensurable in length & power, or which are commensurable
in power only, with the proposed Rational straight line; it is clearly
established that here he calls Irrational those which are incommensurable
with the proposed Rational straight line in both ways, namely in length
and power, and not in length only. From which it is also manifest that
the square root of this number 20. or 1000. &c. or
(what is the same) the line whose square is 20. or 1000. &c. cannot
be called Irrational, since it is not incommensurable in length & power,
but in length only, with the proposed Rational line.

VIII.
And the square which is from the proposed straight line
is called Rational.
Just as that line which is set down as certain and known
is called Rational: so also the square described from it is called Ratio-
nal, because it too is certain and known, and in comparison with it
other surfaces are called commensurable and incommensurable.

IX.
And those commensurable with this indeed [are] Rational.
All plane surfaces commensurable with the square of the proposed
Rational line are called Rational; not indeed by position,
as that [square is], but because, when compared with it, they are found
with it either com-
mensu-