EUCLID. GEOM.

AXIOMS, OR
Pronouncements.

I.

A MAGNITUDE, measuring however many
magnitudes, measures also the composite
from them.

II.

A MAGNITUDE, measuring any
magnitude, measures also every
magnitude which that one measures.

III.

A MAGNITUDE measuring the whole
magnitude, and the part taken away, measures
also the remainder.

THESE axioms, insofar as they pertain to numbers, were set forth
by us in the last three pronouncements of book 7. Therefore since the
same reasoning holds in magnitudes, there is no reason that we should
repeat their demonstrations here in vain, especially since they can be
transferred here word for word, only changing the word “number” into
the word “magnitude”.

MOREOVER, because in this book we had to depart from the numbering
which Theon follows in Euclid’s propositions, as we shall say at prop. 13,
and likewise we have neglected Campanus’s sequence throughout, as we
taught at the beginning of the first book; we took care that a double
number be placed in the margin opposite the propositions, of which the
upper shows Theon’s order, the lower however shows Campanus’s series.
But if only one number is found in the margin, then there is at that time
no difference between
Theon’s
---

BOOK 9.  X.  7

So that you may understand the difference between Theorem and Campanus,
as far as the numbering of the propositions is concerned.

THEOR. I. PROPOS. I.                                   I.

WITH two unequal magnitudes
having been set out, if from the greater there is taken away
more than half; and from that which remains, again there is
taken away more than half; and if this is always done: there
will at length be left some magnitude which will be less than
the lesser magnitude proposed.

LET there be set out two unequal magnitudes
A B, and C, of which A B is the greater. I say that if from A B
there is taken away more than half; and from that which remains,
again more than half; and if this is always done: there will at
length be left some magnitude which is less than C. Let C be
multiplied as many times until the magnitude made D E is
greater than A B, so that D E is a multiple of C, the least
greater than A B. And let D E be divided into parts D F, F G,
G E, equal to C; let there be taken from A B more than half
A H, and from the remainder H B more than half H I; and let
this always be done, until the parts of A B are equal in number
to the parts of D E. Let the parts A H, H I, I B therefore now
be as many as are D F, F G, G E. Therefore D E is greater than
A B: but from D E there has been taken away D F, less than half,
or certainly half, if D E is double of C; but from A B more than
half A H. The remainder E F will be less than the remainder H B.
For since D E is greater than A B; if half is taken from D E, and
also from A B, the remainder from D E would also be greater than
the remainder from A B. If therefore from D E there is taken away
less than half, or certainly half, and from A B more than half,
half;