BOOK X.                                                                 207

BUT because in this book it was necessary for us to depart from the numbering
which Theon follows in Euclid’s propositions, as we shall say at prop. 13,
which likewise in all things we have neglected the order of Campanus, as
we have shown at the beginning of the first book: we have taken care that a double number
be placed in the margin opposite the propositions, of which the upper shows
Theon’s order, but the lower shows Campanus’s sequence. But if only one
number were set down in the margin, you would understand no discrepancy between Theon
and Campanus, as far as the numbering of the propositions is concerned.

THEOREM 1.      PROPOSITION 1.                                     1.

WITH two unequal magnitudes proposed,
if from the greater there be taken away more than the half; and from
that which remains, again there be taken away more than
the half; and this be always done: there will at last be left
some magnitude, which will be less than the proposed lesser
magnitude.

LET there be proposed two unequal magnitudes AB, and
C, of which AB is the greater. I say that if from AB there be taken away more than
the half; and from that which remains, again more than the
half; and this be always done: there will be left some magnitude
which is less than C. For let C be multiplied, so many times,
until the magnitude made DE is greater than AB, so that DE is
a multiple of C, the nearest greater than AB. And DE being divided
into parts DF, FG, GE, equal to C itself,
let there be taken away from AB more than the half
AH, and from the remainder HB more than the half
HI, and let this always be done, until
the parts of AB in number are equal to the parts of DE.
Let therefore now the parts AH, HI, IB be as many as are DF, FG,
GE. Since therefore DE is greater than AB, and from DE there has been taken away
DF, less than the half, or at least the half, if DE is
double; but from AB more than the half AH: the remainder FE
will be greater than the remainder HB. (For since DE is greater than AB; if from
DE the half were taken away, and also from AB the half, there would
also be a remainder from DE greater than the remainder from AB. If therefore from DE there be taken away
less than the half, or at least the half, and from AB more than
the half; the remainder from DE will be greater than the remainder from AB.) Again
since FE is greater than HB, and from FE there will be taken away the half
FG, or at least less than the half, if FE is greater than
double of C; but from HB more than the half HI: in the same
way the remainder GE will be greater than the remainder IB: and thus proceeding
we shall show at last the last part of DE, such as here is
GE, ma-