GEO.        ELE.        EV.

such:/and palms:/and digits/and feet are measures: these
are straight lines, in infinite multitude, commensurable and in-
commensurable. Commensurable indeed: either in power only
or in power and length together. Incommensurable
however: either in length only, or in length and power together.
¶Therefore the proposed straight line itself is called: rational.  6
¶And those commensurable with it both in length and in power,
and in power only: rational.  7
¶But those incommensurable in both, that is in
length and power: are called irrational.  8
¶And the square indeed from the proposed straight line: rational.  9
¶And those commensurable with it: irrational.  10
¶And that from an incommensurable: irrational.  11
¶And those commensurable with it are called: irrational.  12
¶And of these (if they shall be squares) the sides, or also any other
straight lines having power equal to the squares described by them:
are called irrational.  13

Euclid, from Campanus.                 Proposition 1
IF, with two unequal quantities proposed,
the greater is diminished by more than half, and likewise
from the remainder more than half is taken, always proceeding
in the same way: it is necessary that at length a quantity
less than the lesser of those set down is left.
¶CAMP. (Let there be two unequal quantities a and b c; b c the greater, I say that
so many times more than half can be taken from b c, from b c itself or from its remainder, that
it is necessary that the remainder be less than the quantity a. Let a be multiplied so many times until it
exceed b c: and let its multiple d e f be greater than b c. Let there be taken then from b c
more than half: which is g h. And from the remainder which is g e, more than half:
which is g h. Let this be done so many times, until b c is divided into so many parts
as many times as a is contained in d e f. I say then that the last remainder, as here
h c, is less than a. For let h c be multiplied as many times as a was multiplied into d e
f: and let its multiple be k l m. Therefore since each of the quantities k, l, m is
equal to h c, it follows that k also is less than b g, but also l less than g h; and since m
is equal to h c, by separation k l m will be less than b c, therefore less than d e f.
Since therefore d e f is to a as k l m to h c, and d e f is greater than k l m, it follows by
the 14th of the fifth that a is greater than h c, which is the thing proposed. ¶The same follows: if from the
greater half is taken and likewise from the remainder half: and let it be done so many times until the
greater is divided into as many parts as many times the lesser is contained in any of its multiples
exceeding whichever of the proposed quantities is greater.
¶CAMPANUS’ Annotation. (C But it must be noted that this proposition seems
to contradict the fifteenth of the third, proposing that the angle of
contingency is less than any angle contained by two straight lines.
For if any rectilinear angle be set down, if more than half be taken from it,
and likewise more than half from the remainder, it seems necessary that this can be done so many times
until a rectilinear angle smaller than the angle of contingency is left,
the opposite of which he syllogizes in the third. But these are not univocal angles,
for curved and straight are not simply of the same genus. But indeed neither can an
angle of contingency be taken so many times of contingency, that it exceed any rectilinear one,
which is necessary, as is clear from the foregoing demonstration) to this