❧ EUCLID. GEOM.

[uncertain: metices], which treats of the roots of numbers, both rational and ir-
rational, as he calls them, he set forth in discourse: indeed I have altogether
persuaded myself that the understanding of that part of Arith-
metic depends on this 10th book; so far is it, as I think, that the treatment
called [uncertain: r.] is required, in order that this book may be understood more easily. Nor
is it to be denied, however, that he who has mastered the theory of roots and calculation will
perceive this book with greater pleasure than
he who is wholly ignorant of them, because the former can apply the demon-
strations to use, but the latter in no way. For this
reason we also adapted the first ten theorems of the second book to numbers,
so that the student might gain greater delight of mind from it,
and fruit—not, however, that we might think that from them those things would be demon-
strated, but that it could be understood more easily from numbers. Why
therefore (someone will say) as in that book, should there not also in this
book be used examples of numbers, which Algebra employs, so that the matter
might be both of greater pleasure, and convenient for readers? The reason is at hand
why we judged that to be omitted. For since very
few at this time are acquainted with that celebrated art of Algebra,
those numbers, if they were employed, seemed rather to cast
darkness than to give any greater light, and indeed for clarity the minds of students,
for help and light, which we strive to bring by these our commentaries, would take
more inconvenience, and would perceive the demonstrations themselves less:
which could not happen in book 2, since the addition of whole numbers
and multiplication, which alone were necessary there,
there is scarcely anyone who does not know. To this is added that those who are
versed in Algebra can easily adapt the demonstrations of this book
to numbers by themselves, whenever they wish,
especially since even this very thing not long before by Michael Sti-
fel, a noble arithmetician, in the 2nd book of the work which he entitled
On Whole Arithmetic, has been done diligently and accurately.
THEREFORE, to return to the matter in hand, Euclid, beginning the thing itself,
in his manner, from explanations of the terms
which will have to be used, declares in the first place what magnitudes
are called commensurable, defining them to be those which are measured by the same
measure. As two magnitudes
A, B, which the same measure C measures,
(for C measures A, repeated four times,
and taken three times measures B,) are called commensurable. In the
same

A
B
C


❧ BOOK X. ❧                                              3

In the same way commensurable are a line of 20 palms and a
line of 13 palms because that line measures them by a unit palm; and by a
half palm, by a third part of a unit palm, etc.
Likewise surfaces are called commensurable, which are measured by one and the
same surface; and also bodies, commensurable solids,
which the same body or solid measures.

II.

INCOMMENSURABLES, how-
ever, are those for which it happens that no common mea-
sure can be found.

SUCH magnitudes are the diameter of any square and its
side; since they have no common measure, as will be demonstrated
by Euclid in the last proposition of this book. There are also very many other incommensurable
lines, for which indeed no common measure can in any way
be given, many of which this book explains, and teaches by what
method they can be found. Again surfaces are called in-
commensurable, and also solids, which admit no common
measure.

III.

STRAIGHT lines are commen-
surable in power, when their squares measure the same
space.

OF straight lines, some are commensurable
in length, namely those which another line, as a common
measure, measures; of which sort are those which in the exposition we define,
which we simply call commensurable: but some are incommensurable
in length, namely those which no line, as a common
measure, measures. Again of lines which are
incommensurable in length, some are of such a kind that their
squares are commensurable, but others are so disposed that also the
A 3
squares