202            EUCLID. GEOM.

in the last poſition of this book, will be demonſtrated by Euclid.  There are alſo
very many other incommenſurable lines, to which indeed no
common meaſure can in any way be given, many of which this
book the Geometer explains, and teaches too by what method they
can be found.  Further,
ſurfaces are called incommenſurable, and ſolids incommen-
ſurable, which admit no common meaſure.

III.

STRAIGHT lines are commenſurable in power, when
their ſquares meaſure the ſame area.

OF straight lines, ſome are commenſurable in
length, namely those which another line, as a common meaſure,
meaſures; of which kind are those which in the expoſition, defin. 1,
we called commenſurable ſimply: but ſome are incommenſurable
in length, namely those which no line, as a common meaſure,
meaſures.  Further, of lines which are incommenſurable
in length, ſome are of ſuch a kind that their ſquares are commen-
ſurable, but others are ſo that their ſquares too are incommen-
ſurable.  Therefore those lines incommenſurable in length,
whose ſquares are commenſurable, are here called by Eu-
clid commenſurable in power; becauſe indeed according to their
powers, that is according to their ſquares (for, as we ſaid at propoſ.
47. book 1, the power of any line is the ſquare deſcribed on it)
they are commenſurable, although they themſelves according to
length are altogether incommenſurable.

BUT if anyone aſk why Euclid defined ſeparately lines commenſurable
in power and not commenſurable in length, it muſt be anſwered,
that lines commenſurable in length are explained ſufficiently and
more than enough in the definition of commenſurable magnitudes,
ſince one common meaſure meaſures lines of this kind, as has been
ſaid:  But truly, becauſe lines commenſurable in power can be
meaſured by no common meaſure, but only their ſquares meaſure
the ſame area, therefore it was altogether neceſſary that they be
explained by their own definition.

IV.

INCOMMENSURABLE however, when with their
ſquares no area, which may be a common mea-
ſure of them, happens to be found.

THE remaining lines incommenſurable in length, whose
ſquares alſo are incommenſurable, he calls incommenſurabi-
le in power.

BUT lines commenſurable both in length
and in power have this, as it were, agreement among themſelves, and connection,
that li-