BOOK  TENTH.                                                                  24

For if we were to call the magnitudes which we call uncertain (by their proper denomination) irrational,
we would have taken away from them the possession of ratio, as if asserting that they are deprived of ratio
either among their own species, or indeed with respect to certain [magnitudes], which is far from the case.
For although they are deprived of commensuration with certain [magnitudes], they will not however be deprived of ratio,
but will have ratio, by the 4th definition of the fifth; for when multiplied they exceed one another,
and moreover (from the third definition of the same) they are of the same genus as regards quantity,
namely, if they are lines, they have the same genus of quantity, length; if surfaces, length and breadth; if solids indeed,
three dimensions. Therefore, having ratio, they cannot be called irrational as between certain and uncertain.
Nor are irrational [magnitudes] so called, [as] uncertain magnitudes compared with uncertain [magnitudes] of the same species,
which namely are commensurable with one another, and admit the ratio of numbers, as we have said.
For these have a known ratio, but those a mute, or unknown, uncertain, or indeterminate ratio,
since they do not have that which numbers have among themselves. Therefore we call those magnitudes uncertain rather than irrational,
just as, more soundly, we oppose certain [magnitudes] to rational [ones]; for rational has nothing to do with certainty:
they are indeed distinct qualities. Diversity of genus removes ratio of quantity (from the third definition of the fifth) between quantities,
just as diversity of genus of commensuration removes commensuration: for ratio is more general than commensuration.
For not all quantities having ratio are commensurable, but all commensurable [quantities] must have ratio.
We further commend [what] we have said: that none of these quantities (which we call uncertain, but others irrational) can be said to be uncertain from itself.
But any one of them, in its own place, can be called uncertain when compared with another,
when namely a comparison of one species to another is made, which always lacks denomination;
this uncertain comparison, made, denominates the proposed magnitude uncertain by the compared quantity,
not however for this reason uncertain, because it draws uncertainty from its own nature, we shall say,
but we shall judge the uncertainty to have been made by an uncertain comparison;
therefore quantities take this uncertainty from the comparison of diverse species, not from the nature of quantity,
as we may make easy by an example. Let the line A B be cut in

G in extreme and mean ratio, by the 11th of the second or
the 30th of the sixth. Therefore the three straight lines A B, A G & G B are among themselves (in whatever way compared) uncertain,
as will be more fully evident in the sixth of the thirteenth. Yet it is permitted to us to propose any one of these to be compared with the others;
for if we propose A G, the greater segment, this proposed straight line (to which the remaining A B & G B, incommensurable with it, are compared)
will be called certain, which by an uncertain comparison makes the others compared to it uncertain. Similarly if to the whole A B are compared A G, G B,
the single segments, or if to the smaller G B the whole and the greater have been compared. Therefore any proposed [line] can be called certain,
and its quantity will be known, but those remaining (a comparison having been made) will be uncertain, unknown, and indeterminate,
not indeed by defect of quantity, but by the relation of comparison, which is uncertain and wholly lacks denomination.
For what prevents taking the whole A B as an ell, whose greater segment is some other ell?
For if we make the Lyon ell in extreme and mean ratio, the greater segment will not be far from the Antwerp ell;
nevertheless each of them, among its own [people], will be a certain and proposed quantity, but the other, compared to it, will be called uncertain.
For each, multiplied by however many units, whether in increase or in decrease, produces magnitudes having the same ratio,
from the fifteenth of the fifth. And therefore units measuring another, or counting,
with units counting the remaining [one], will be incommensurable, since the whole to the whole will have been incom-