402                      EUCLID. GEOM.
the last poſitions of this book will be demonſtrated by Euclid. There are alſo very
many other incommeſurable lines, to which indeed no certain meaſure can in any
way be given, many of which the Geometer explains in this book, and teaches that
certain reaſons can be found. Again, two ſurfaces are incommeſurable, and incom-
meſurable ſolids, which no meaſure can meaſure nor [have] a common meaſure.

III.

STRAIGHT lines are commenſurable in power, when
their ſquares meaſure the ſame area.

OF straight lines, ſome are commenſurable in length, namely which
another line, as a common meaſure, meaſures; of which kind are those
which in the expoſition of defin. I we called commenſurable ſimply:
but ſome are incommeſurable in length, namely which no line, as a
common meaſure, meaſures. Again, of lines which are incommeſurable
in length, ſome are of ſuch a kind that their ſquares are commenſurable,
but others are ſo that even their ſquares are incommeſurable. Therefore
those lines incommeſurable in length, whoſe ſquares are commenſurable,
are here called by Euclid commenſurable in power; becauſe indeed
according to their powers, that is, according to their ſquares (for if, as
we ſaid at prop. 47. book I, the power of any line is the ſquare deſcribed
on it) they are commenſurable, although they themſelves according to
length are altogether incommeſurable.

BUT if anyone aſk, why Euclid has defined lines commenſurable in
power, but not commenſurable in length, it muſt be anſwered, that
lines commenſurable in length have been explained ſufficiently and
more than enough in the definition of commenſurable magnitudes,
ſince one common meaſure meaſures lines of this kind, as was ſaid:
But becauſe lines commenſurable in power cannot be meaſured by any
common meaſure, but only their ſquares meaſure the ſame area, there-
fore it was altogether neceſſary that they be explained by a proper
definition.

IV.

INCOMMENSURABLE however, when with their
ſquares no area, which may be their common meaſure,
happens to be found.

THE remaining lines incommeſurable in length, whoſe
ſquares alſo are incommeſurable, he calls incommeſurable in
power.

BUT lines commenſurable both in length and in power have this
whatever meaſure among themſelves, and commenſuration,
as if—