30

EUCLID’S ELEMENTS
TENTH

Commensurable magnitudes are said to be those measured by the same
measure. Incommensurable, those for which no common measure
can come to be. Straight lines are incommensurable in square, when
the squares on them are measurable by the areas on them.
Incommensurable, when for the squares on them, no common
measure can come to be. With these laid down it is shown
that to the proposed straight line there exist straight lines in an infinite
multitude commensurable and incommensurable, some in length and in square, others in square only.
— Let the proposed straight line be called rational. — And those commensurable with it,
either in length and in square, or in square only, rational. But those incommensurable with it,
let them be called irrational. And the square on the proposed straight line rational.
And those commensurable with it. But those incommensurable with it,
let them be called irrational, and the (lines) in square also irrational. If they are squares,
the sides themselves, or let them be some rectilinear figures, and the squares on them
are described.

Of two unequal magnitudes set out, if from the greater there be subtracted
a measure or a half, and the remainder be greater than a half,
and this happens continually, there will be left some magnitude which will be less
than the given lesser magnitude. Let there be two unequal magnitudes, the
ab, gd, of which the ab is greater. I say that if from the ab there be subtracted a measure or a half, and the remainder be greater than a half, and this happens continually, there will be left some magnitude which will be less
than the magnitude gd. For let the magnitude ab be multiplied at some time; let it be
multiplied, and let it be de. Since ab is greater than a half
of de, it is equal to dz or ke, or let there be subtracted from de the ab greater than a half, let it be bz,
and from ae greater than a half, let it be dk, and so let it happen continually. Since if from the
divisions of ab, an equal number come to be, to the divisions of gd and de; let there be
the kk and bb divisions, equal in number to those of gd and de. Further let de be greater
than ab, and let the half be subtracted from it, ez, and from ab
greater than a half, bz. Therefore the remainder zd. Therefore the zd is less
than a half of de, and further let kl be greater than dz, and let the half be subtracted from it, lh,
and from dz greater than a half, dh. Therefore the remainder hk. Therefore hk is less
than a half of kl, and so let it happen continually. Therefore ak will be less
than a half of the given lesser magnitude gd. Which I showed.

Otherwise.
And similarly it will be shown, even if the half is what is subtracted. Let there be set out two
unequal magnitudes ab gd, and let the lesser be the given gd.
Let the magnitude ab be multiplied at some time; therefore it has become de.
And let it be divided into equals of gd, the hth or kl, and from de let there be subtracted
greater than the half, eb, and from hth greater than the half, hl, and so let it happen continually
[illegible]

A  B  G  D