250  THE NINTH ELEMENT  Book 9.

the number made from P by O, is the same as that which is produced from B by H,
therefore as P is to B, so is H to O: but P was the same as B, therefore H
shall be the same as O, which is absurd; for O was set different from any
of the numbers A, B, C, D, E, G, H, or I; Therefore, A, B, C, D, E, G, H,
and I, do only measure the number F, which they do compose: There-
fore, it from Unity, &c. Which was to be demonstrated.

SCHOLIUM.

Euclid in these three foregoing Books intends only Arith-
metical Numbers and not continuous quantity in which there hap-
pens Fractions; but in numbers there happens none, but only in
relation to the things numbered when they are divided into other
parts, which are called Fractions, insofar as they are compared
to their whole divided into a certain number of equal parts, which
are yet nevertheless explained by whole numbers, that is to
say, by the numbers of which Euclid speaks in these three fore-
going Books; and then when such continuous quantities are re-
duced to the same equal parts, they are no more Fractions, and
numbers compared to such things, are compared the one to the
other as whole numbers, and are taken absolutely, without re-
ferring them to any entire quantity, and all the demonstrations
and operations, which may be performed by vulgar Fractions
or common Arithmetic, are all performed by Arithmetical and
whole numbers, concerning which Euclid speaks in these Se-
venth, Eighth, and Ninth Books.

The End of the Ninth Element of EUCLID.


Book 10.  OF EUCLID.  251

THE
TENTH ELEMENT
OF
EUCLID.

The Argument.

Euclid having finished those things which
concern numbers in the three fore-
going Books, so far forth as was needful
for the understanding of Geometrical
things: Now in this Tenth Book, he at-
tempts the discussion of commen-
surable and incommensurable Lines, for
the whole cause, as we have said, those Books
of numbers were undertaken by him. For without the know-
ledge of these Lines, diverse Magnitudes, as well Solids, as
Plains, can neither be perfectly understood, nor brought in-
to practice when it is required, because diverse of their sides
are incommensurable, which may be said likewise of Plains,
and Solids themselves, for they also are often times incom-
mensurable, as we shall demonstrate at the end of this Book.

DEFINITIONS.

A
B
C

I Commensurable magnitudes A and
B, are such as are measured by one
and the same common measure C

K k 2      Euclid