250  THE NINTH ELEMENT  Lib. 9.

number made of P by O, is the ſame as that which is produced of B by H,
therefore r as P is to B, ſo is H to O: but P was the ſame with B, therefore H
ſhall be the ſame with O, which is abſurd; for O was put different from any
of the numbers A, B, C, D, E, G, H, or I; Therefore, A, B, C, D, E, G, H,
and I, do only meaſure the number F, the which they do compoſe: There-
fore, it from Unity, &c. Which was to be demonstrated.

SCHOLIUM.

Euclide in theſe three fore-going Books intends only Arith-
metical Numbers and not continued quantity in which there hap-
pens Fractions; but in numbers there happens none, but only in
relation to the things numbred when they are divided into other
parts, which are called Fractions, inſomuch as they are compared
to their whole divided into certain number of equal parts, the
which are yet nevertheleſſe explained by whole numbers, that is to
ſay, by the numbers of which Euclide ſpeakes in theſe three fore-
going Books; and then when ſuch continued quantities are re-
duced to the ſame equal parts, they are no more Fractions, and
numbers compared to ſuch things, are compared the one to the
other as whole numbers, and are taken abſolutely, without re-
ferring them to any intire quantity, and all the demonstrations
and operations, which may be performed by vulgar Fractions
or common Arithmetick, are all performed by Arithmetical and
whole numbers, concerning which Euclide ſpeakes in theſe Se-
venth, Eighth, and Ninth Books.

The End of the Ninth Element of EUCLIDE.


Lib. 10.  OF EUCLIDE.  251

THE
TENTH ELEMENT
OF
EUCLIDE.

The Argument.

Euclide having finiſhed thoſe things which
concern numbers in the three fore-go-
ing Books, ſo far forth as was needful
for the underſtanding of Geometrical
things: Now in this Tenth Book, he at-
tempts the diſputation of commenſu-
rable and incommenſurable Lines, for
whole cauſe, as we have ſaid, thoſe Books
of numbers were undertaken by him. For without the know-
ledge of theſe Lines, divers Magnitudes, as well Solids, as
Plaines, can neither be perfectly underſtood, nor brought in-
to practice when it is required, becauſe divers of their ſides
are incommenſurable, which may be ſaid likewiſe of Plains,
and Solids themſelves, for they alſo are often times incom-
menſurable, as we ſhall demonſtrate at the end of this Book.

DEFINITIONS.

A
B
C

I Commenſurable magnitudes A and
B, are ſuch as are meaſured by one
and the ſame common meaſure C

K k 2      Euclide