BOOK  TEN.                                                                     24

For if we were to call the magnitudes which we call uncertain (by their proper denomination) irrational,
we would have taken away from them the possession of ratio, as if asserting that they are deprived of ratio
either among their own species, or indeed with respect to certain [magnitudes], which is far from the case.
For although they are deprived of commensuration with certain [magnitudes], they will not be deprived of ratio,
but will have ratio, by the 4th definition of the fifth; for when multiplied they exceed one another, and moreover
(by the third definition of the same) they are of the same genus with respect to quantity; namely, if they are lines,
they have the same genus of quantity, length; if surfaces, length and breadth; if solids indeed, three dimensions.
Therefore, having ratio, they cannot be called irrational as certain to uncertain.
They are also called irrational less [properly], [namely] uncertain magnitudes compared with uncertain [magnitudes]
of the same species, which indeed are commensurable with one another, and admit the ratio of numbers, as we said.
For these have a known ratio, but those a mute, or unknown, uncertain, or indeterminate ratio, since they do not have
that which numbers have among themselves. Therefore we call those magnitudes uncertain rather than irrational,
just as, more soundly, we oppose certain [magnitudes] to rational [ones]; for rational has nothing to do with certainty:
they are indeed distinct qualities. Diversity of genus removes ratio of quantity (by the third definition of the fifth)
between quantities, just as diversity of genus of commensuration removes commensuration: for ratio is more general
than commensuration. For not all quantities having ratio are commensurable, but all commensurable [quantities]
must necessarily have ratio.
We further commend what we said: that none of these quantities (which we call uncertain, but others irrational)
can be said to be uncertain from itself. But any of them, each in its own place, can be called uncertain when compared
with another, namely when there is a comparison of one species to another, which always lacks denomination; this uncertain
comparison, made, denominates the proposed magnitude as uncertain by the compared quantity; yet we shall not say it is uncertain
for this reason, that it draws uncertainty from its own nature, but we shall judge the uncertainty to have been made from an uncertain
comparison; therefore quantities take this uncertainty from the comparison of different species, not from the nature of quantity,
as we make easy by an example. Let the line A B be cut in

G in extreme and mean ratio, by the 11th of the second or
the 30th of the sixth. Therefore the three straight lines A B, A G and G B are among themselves (insofar as compared)
uncertain, as will be more fully evident in the sixth of the thirteenth. Yet it is permitted to us to propose any one of these
to be compared with the others; for if we propose A G, the greater segment, this proposed straight line (to which the remaining
A B and G B, incommensurable with it, are compared) will be called certain, which by an uncertain comparison makes the others
compared with it uncertain. Similarly if the single segments A G, G B are compared to the whole A B, or if the whole and the greater
are compared to the smaller G B. Therefore any proposed [line] can be called certain, and its quantity will be known; but the others
(by the comparison made) will be uncertain, unknown, and indeterminate, not indeed by the assessment of quantity, but by the relation
of comparison, which is uncertain and wholly lacks denomination. For what prevents taking the whole A B as a cubit, whose greater segment
is some other cubit? For if we were to make the Lyon cubit in extreme and mean ratio, the greater segment will not be far from the Antwerp
cubit; nevertheless each of them among its own [people] will be a certain and proposed quantity, but the other, compared to it, will be called
uncertain. For each, multiplied by however many units, whether in increase or in decrease, produces magnitudes having the same ratio,
by the fifteenth of the fifth. And therefore, one unit measuring another, or counting, the units counting the remaining [one], will be
incommensurable, since the whole to the whole will have been incom-