BOOK X.
The Translator.

I
This definition is much broader and more general than the other, because this one
wants that even those lines which are commensurable only in power with our proposed
rational (that is, with our measure of a pace, or a rod, or some other kind of measure)
should be called rational; so that it follows that those quantities which are commonly
called by practitioners “strong root” and irrational (as would be the square root of ten
or of twelve and of every other non-square number), the author wants that, since such
quantities are lines, they be called rational (because their square is rational); and if it
were not so, it would follow that there would be great disagreement in the definitions
of binomials and remainders, and in other propositions of this tenth [book], as by
proceeding one may easily know; it is true that if such quantities were surfaces they
will then be called irrational and medial, as in the thirteenth proposition of this [book]
one may see,

Definition vi.

6
4  And those lines which will be incommensurable with the same [one] are
   called irrational, or surds.

The Translator.

A
Also this definition must be understood as joined successively to the preceding one
of the first translation; because in this he defines that all those lines which will not be
commensurable with the same our proposed straight line (that is, with our proposed
material measure) are called irrational lines, or surds; nevertheless this same definition
in the second translation speaks in another way, namely.

And those lines which will be incommensurable with that [one] in one
and the other way, that is in length, and in power, are called
irrational.

I
Which definition, understanding it as joined successively with the preceding (indeed
of the second translation), comes to conform with the converse of that, that is, that a
line incommensurable only in length with our measure ought not to be called, nor
understood [as] irrational (as above was said of the preceding); rather he wants it to be
understood [as] rational because its square is rational; but it is necessary to note that
the common crowd of practitioners up to the present (following the translation of
Campanus) will say of all non-square numbers, and saying lines as if they were surfaces,
they call them irrational and surds. Nevertheless they must be understood [as] rational
being lines, as the second translation speaks; otherwise there would follow (as I said
above) great disagreement in the books that will follow in this tenth [book], etc.

Definition vii.

7
0  But every square surface with which, by the presupposed reasoning, is
   called rational.

The Translator.

P
For greater understanding of this definition it is necessary to note that when
we desire to know the quantity of some surface, we consider in what
proportion