190    Euclid’s Elements

however measures the number K, when it has made K by multiplying into E: wherefore all these numbers are aliquot parts of the number K.
  It remains to prove that the number K has no other aliquot parts. For let another aliquot part L be set down; I show that this is one of the hundreds. For let the number K be measured by M: therefore L multiplied into M produces K; but also E multiplied into D produces K, therefore E is to M as L to D. And because A, namely 1, is the prime number nearest to unity, and L is different from all A B C D, the number L will not measure the number D (by 13. 9.) therefore neither will E measure M. And since E is a prime number, E and M will be prime to one another (by 31. 7.) and least in their ratio (by 2. 7. and by 21. 7.) E measures L, and M measures D. And since A is prime, M will be one of A. B. C. D. (by 13. 9.) let it be the same as B. And as many as are B, C, D let there be taken from E the doubles F, G, H. and from this, as B is to D so will E be to H, therefore the same is made from B into H as from D into E, namely

K. And because L measures K by M; and in L will make K. therefore the same K is made from L into M, and from B into H; and since M has been shown to be the same as B, L will also be the same as H. Therefore no H has aliquot parts other than those previously set down.
  From this proposition we shall find all perfect numbers: for the sum of 1 and 2 is a prime number; which multiplied by 2 makes 6 a perfect number. The sum 1.2.4 makes 7. which multiplied by 4 makes 28 a perfect number. The sum 1.2.4.8 makes 15 a composite number. The sum 1.2.4.8.16 makes 31. From which we show a perfect number to be produced. But the sum will easily be had, if unity be cast away from some [number], let it be the sum of the antecedents. But few of this kind have been found, namely only eleven 6.28.496.8128. 33550336. 8589869056.
137438691328. 238823843008. 2096128. and none intermediate.
  But these are very useless, and therefore let them suffice.

EUCLID’S
ELEMENTS
BOOK  TENTH.

Definitions.

1  Commensurable magnitudes, which the same
   common measure measures.
2  Incommensurable, which no common mea-
   sure measures.
3  Straight lines are commensurable in power
   when their squares the same common measure
   measures.
4  Straight lines are incommensurable in power
   when their squares no common measure
   measures.
5  The line with which the rest are compared, and in
   order to which they are said to be commensurable or incom-
   mensurable either in length, or in power, is
   called rational.
6  Lines which are commensurable with the rational, either
   in length or in power only, are called ratio-
   nal.
7  But those which are incommensurable with the rational, both
   in length, and in power, are called irrational.
8  The square of a rational line is called rational.
9  All surfaces commensurable with a rational square
   are called rational.
10 And surfaces incommensurable with this, or squares,
   are called irrational.
11 But the lines which are sides of incommensurable squares
   are called irrational.

AXIOM I.

A magnitude measuring however many magnitudes,
measures also the whole composed of them.

AXIOM II.

A magnitude measuring however many magnitudes,
measures also every [magnitude] which it measures.

AXIOM III.

A magnitude measuring the whole, measures also the part taken away,
and the remainder.

PROPOSITION I.

If from a magnitude there be taken away more than half,
and from the remainder more than half, or half,
and so on in succession, there will be left a quantity
less than any proposed.

A.  B

Let there be a quantity A from which you take away half,
or more than half, and from the remainder more than half,
and so on in succession; I say
it can be done so that there is left a quantity less
than B. Let the quantity B be multiplied until thus mul-
tiplied it exceeds the magnitude A: Let B taken
three times exceed the magnitude A; I say
then by subtractions of a half from the quantity A
there is left a quantity less than B.
  Demonstration. For if from the triple of B you take away B,
you take away less than half, from A a smaller [thing] is taken away,
half: or more than half: therefore that
which is left from A is less than that which
is left from the triple of B, namely than the double of B. Again
from the double of B let B be taken away, and from the remainder from A let there be taken away