280  EUCLID. GEOM.

can be said of the solids themselves as well, since it very often extends to these
incommensurables, as we shall demonstrate at the end of this book. But since
this book is obscure to many because of difficulties, because of the obscurity of
the lines about which it speaks; I shall strain every nerve of my industry in it,
so that from those things which up to now have been demonstrated by Euclid,
it may be made so plain and easy that, without much labor, it can be grasped
by anyone who has correctly understood the demonstrations of the preceding
books. Nor indeed can I go into the opinion of those who think that, for its
understanding, that part of Arithmetic is necessary which sets forth discourse
concerning the roots of numbers, both rational and irrational, as they call them:
indeed, on the contrary, I am thoroughly persuaded that a perfect knowledge
of that part of Arithmetic depends on this 10th book; so far am I from thinking
that that treatment of roots is required in order that this book may be understood
easily. It cannot, however, be denied that he who holds the theory of roots and
calculation will perceive this book with greater pleasure than one who is wholly
ignorant of them, because the former can bring the demonstrations back to use,
but the latter in no way. For this reason we too adapted the first ten theorems
of the second book to numbers, so that the studious person might take from it
greater delight of mind and profit; not, however, because we thought that those
things which are demonstrated in that book could be understood more easily
from numbers. Therefore (someone will say) why, in that book, not likewise in
this one, did you employ examples of numbers which Algebra uses, so that the
matter might be both for greater pleasure and more convenient for readers? The
reason is at hand why we thought that should be omitted. For since very few at
this time are acquainted with that most celebrated art of Algebra, those numbers,
if they were introduced, would seem rather to pour on darkness than to give any
greater light and clarity; since thus, instead of the advantage and light which we
labor to bring by these our commentaries, the minds of students would take more
inconvenience and would perceive the demonstrations themselves less: which
could not happen in Book 2, since addition of whole numbers and multiplication,
which alone were necessary there, there is hardly anyone who does not know.
To this is added that those who are practiced in Algebra can, with easy effort,
adapt the demonstrations of this book to numbers by themselves, when they wish
to do so