Tenth

¶ Euclid’s Elements, the Tenth Book, and most diffe-
cult, from the tradition of Theon, translated by Barthol-
omew Zamberto the Venetian.

¶ First Definition.
Commensurable magnitudes are called those which
the same measure measures.

¶ Second Definition.
¶ Incommensurable, however, are those which fall under
no dimension of a common measure,

¶ Third Definition.
¶ Straight lines commensurable in power are those from
which □□ the same area is measured.

¶ Fourth Definition.
¶ Incommensurable, however, when the squares from them are measured by no area with a common
measure.

¶ With these set forth it is indicated: that the proposed straight line, that is, which: and cubits: and
palms: and digits and feet are taken as measures. There are straight lines in
infinite multitude: commensurable and incommensurable: some indeed in
length and power: others truly in power only. Therefore the proposed straight
line itself is called rational: and those commensurable with it, both in length
and power, and in power only, rational. But those incommensurable in
both ways, that is in length and power, are called irrational. And that which
indeed is a rational square from the proposed straight line: and those commensurable
with it, rational: and that which is from an incommensurable, irrational: and those commensurable
with it, irrational, are called. And the powers themselves, whether their squares are the sides themselves,
or other straight lines equal to them □□ describing: are called irrational.

¶ First Theorem, first proposition.
¶ With such unequal magnitudes set out: if from the
greater there be taken more than the half: and from that which is left
more than the half: and if this be done always: there will be left some
magnitude less than the lesser magnitude set out.

¶ Let there be two unequal magnitudes, ab, c, of which the greater is ab. I say that if
from ab there be taken more than the half, and from the remainder more than the half, and this
be done always, there will be left some magnitude less than the lesser magnitude set out, c. Therefore,
c multiplied will be greater than ab; let ab be multiplied and let de be a multiple
of it, of c; but de is a multiple of c, greater than ab. And let de be divided into
unequals to c, that is df, fg, ge. And let there be taken from ab more than the half, bh, and from ah more than the
half, that is hk. And let this be done similarly each time: from ab there are equal divisions; let them be
in multitude equal to the divisions which are in de; therefore let ak, kh, and hb be
equal divisions existing in multitude to df, fg, and ge. And since de is greater than
ab, let there be taken from de less than the half, that is eg, from

L