EUCLID.  ELEMENTS.  GEO.

From the same actions or passions an understanding is acquired by us: but this certainty is then present, when
we suppose, or understand, the nature or origin of the quantity of a line, that is, its denomination: because
truly it is permitted for us to propose any (as we said in the preface) that which has been proposed we shall
call certain.

Sixth Definition.

And those commensurable with this, either in length & power, or in
power only, [are] certain.

Seventh Definition.

But those incommensurable with the same in length & power, are
called uncertain.

Since I said that a straight line can be made commensurable with a straight line, in power only, and moreover
in power & length with another, all these which are certain, or exist commensurable either in power only, or indeed in length &
power together, are likewise to be called certain. For it is enough that some straight line be called certain, that it be joined with a certain [one] by some commensuration, of length, or of power, with a certain [one] proposed.
But on the contrary, that [line] is called uncertain, which with a certain [one] proposed has no commensuration,
either in its length, or in its own compared power. But why Euclid called that straight line certain,
which, being proposed, exists commensurable with a certain [one] in power only, although in length it is incommensurable with the same proposed,
some might think must be left unknown. For since the affinity of geometrical quantities,
which is called ratio, is divided by a principal disjunction into known and unknown. But the known must be expressed by numbers only,
Euclid follows the nature of numbers in expressing the relations of quantities:
for although every number is the side of some square, yet not every number as a side
has a square, but all numbers among themselves are commensurable. It will follow therefore if the
square of a line which has been proposed certain is incommensurable in length, is commensurable with the
square of the certain [line] itself (that is, by some units of numbers the same measure measures both squares)
those [squares] will be said to have the ratio of numbers among themselves (namely, of repeating a common measure) but
squares arise from sides drawn into themselves. It will follow therefore that those lines which, drawn into themselves, generate areas
having the ratio of numbers (that is, certain), cannot be deprived of this certainty, because with respect to themselves
they generate units which are also certain. Wherefore for that cause he called them certain (if Euclid found it so) but the rest on the contrary,
which, drawn into themselves, produce incommensurable areas, and therefore have length and power
incommensurable, he called uncertain, and the certain have a ratio unknown, because whatever
units are applied to them, are incommensurable with one another, and have an uncertain ratio.

NOTICE.

But this certain [term] Campanus and Zambertius translated into Latin as rational, far indeed from the Greek
exemplar, but as the Greek [has] by this word ῥητὴ, which more truly is read for certain, determined and manifest,
and moreover certain would agree more with this sense than rational. For the word rational,
of itself carries a habit, either in action, or in passion. For if rational is said of a certain [line] by action, because
it has some ratio to another, or by passion, because another has a ratio to it, hence the denomination
belongs not only to it, but to whatever is incommensurable with it, or even uncertain. For those
have to others of the same kind (as to dimensions) a ratio known among themselves, certain, to others
but either to certain [ones] it has a ratio, since they are of the same kind as to quantity (by the third definition
of the fifth [book]) yet unknown. All therefore deserve to be called rational, because among themselves they
have a ratio. But to others, which would be confused and therefore absurd, no otherwise than if we should call some single line
rational, from having a ratio, for a single line does not have a ratio, since ratio requires at least two
terms. Therefore those proposed straight lines cannot aptly be named rational, but certain or
determined, &c. Besides, neither do we see Euclid to have called them rational, but certain. But Campanus
and Zambertius to have taken that to themselves only, because when Theon wrote with the appended to this ῥητὴ the word
λογου in the seventh definition, not with Euclid’s Greek word (by which rather he would have said ἄῤῥητον for
uncertain) but it is manifest, that outside Euclid’s meaning, he brought forth the word irrational, which by privation of ratio,
he would call uncertain magnitudes, which among themselves, as we said, have a
certain and known ratio, but to certain [ones] although unknown or indeterminate it has a
ratio