THE TENTH ELEMENT.                                   5

FROM CLAVIUS.

THEREFORE, according to the opinion of Euclid, the square root of this number is 20. or 1000. etc. But what is the same thing, the straight line whose
square is 20. or 1000. etc. is called Rational, since in power it is commensurable with the Rational line (for indeed both the number
20. and 1000. are commensurable with any square number, as 16. 100. etc.) although in length it is incommensurable
with the same.
Therefore not a few Arithmeticians are foolish, who for that reason call it Irrational, because it cannot be expressed by number.

DEFINITION VII.

But those incommensurable with this are called Irrational.

SINCE earlier Euclid said that lines which are commensurable with a proposed rational [line], either
in length and power together, or in power only, are rational: it is clear that those which
are incommensurable with it in both ways are irrational.

DEFINITION VIII.

And the square which is made from the proposed straight [line] is called Rational.

IF from a rational line a square is described, it is necessary that it be rational. For
just as that line which is proposed is always of known magnitude (since it is taken and made one at pleasure),
so the square described from it is always determinate and known and therefore Rational.
But other surfaces which are compared with it, if perhaps with that square they have some area
as a common measure, are called Commensurable; if they do not have [it], they ought to be judged Incommensurable.

DEFINITION IX.

And those commensurable with this indeed [are called] Rational.

IF the proposed square is Rational, all other squares which are commensurable
with it will be Rational. For just as lines which are commensurable with a proposed rational [line],
either in length and power together, or in power only, are Rational: so surfaces
and squares which are commensurable with a surface are Rational.
Which is true not only as far as squares, but also as far as the other
geometrical figures which among themselves have some area as a common measure.

FROM CLAVIUS.

BUT since lines having powers themselves [i.e., squares on the lines] are spaces commensurable with the Rational square of the proposed Rational line, they are at least
commensurable in power with the Rational line from the 3rd definition; it is evident that they too are to be called, according to definition 6, Rational.

DEFINITION X.

But those incommensurable with this are called Irrational.

FROM CLAVIUS.

IN no other way are plane surfaces incommensurable with the square described on a Rational line called Irrational; and lines which
are wholly incommensurable with a proposed Rational [line] have been called Irrational.

DEFINITION XI.

And straight [lines], which can [produce] the same, [are] Irrational: if indeed those squares are, the same in breadth-
B