BOOK.

¶ The tenth, most excellent, most difficult book of Euclid concerning thirteen
irrational lines: and with the interpretation of the very good Campanus.
By Master Luca Paciolo of Borgo San Sepolcro. Of the
Order of Minors. A most careful editor. Begins.

Quantities in which one
quantity, numbering them, is
said to be commensurable with them.
But those in which there is not one
quantity, numbering them,
are said to be incommensura-
ble. 2 ¶ Lines commensurable
in power are spoken of as surfaces
squared, which one common surface numbers.
3 ¶ Lines incommensurable in
power are spoken of as surfaces
squared, which one common
surface does not number.
Which things being so, it is
manifest that to every line there are many others incommensura-
ble: some in length, some in length and in
power. 4 ¶ But let the line with which we reason, being set down, be called
rational. 5 ¶ Lines commensurable with it are called rational. 6 ¶ But those
incommensurable with the same are called irrational or mute. 7 ¶ But the square
surface of which, by hypothesis, the rational [line] is said to be numbered, is called rational.
8 ¶ And surfaces commensurable with it are called rational. 9 ¶ But surfaces
incommensurable with the same are called irrational or mute.
10 ¶ But the sides which produce those squares are called irro-
nalia. 11. ¶ Any quantity can be multiplied so many times that it
exceeds any given quantity of the same kind.

a  e  f  k  l  m
7  7  7 2  2  b 2
a
b  c
7  7  3  2

¶ Proposition .1.
¶ In two unequal quantities set forth,
let more than half be taken away from the greater; and likewise from the remainder
let more than half be taken away successively in the same way:
it is necessary that at length, in the lesser of the
quantities set forth, a smaller quantity be left.
¶ Let there be two unequal quantities, a.f. b.c. the greater; I say that
as often as more than half is taken away from a.b.c. or from its remainder,
it is necessary that a quantity less than the lesser be left.
Let a be multiplied n times, as many times as it exceeds b.c.; and let
its multiple d.e.f. be greater than b.c.; let b.c. be taken away so that a.b.c. be more than half;
let it be b.g.; and likewise from the remainder which is g.e. let more than half be, which is g.h.;
let this also be done so many times until b.c. has been divided into as many parts as
a is contained in d.e.f. ¶ I say then that the last remainder, as is h.i.c., is less than
a multiplied. For since b.c. is as many times as a has been multiplied into d.e.f., and its
multiple is k.l.m. ¶ Therefore because each of the quantities k.l.i. is equal
to b.c., it follows that t.k. is less than b.g., but t.l. less than g.h.; and because m is equal
to b.c., it will be, by conception, that k.l. is less than b.c.; wherefore less than d.e.f. since
therefore d.e.f. to a is as k.l.m. to b.c., and d.e.f. is greater than k.l.m., it follows by 4.
of the fifth that a is greater than b.c., which is the thing proposed. ¶ And this follows if from the greater
half be taken away, and likewise from the remainder half; and so often until the greater
is divided into as many parts as the lesser is contained in any of its multiples,
the greater being set forth exceeding any quantity. ¶ But it is necessary to attend that
to this, as it seems, the third contradicts, proposing an angle of contingency to be
less than any angle contained by two straight lines, prop. n. an angle
than any rectilinear angle. ¶ In b̄ let more than half be taken away, and likewise from the remainder
more than half; it is judged necessary that this be done so often, it being set forth, until an angle