102        EUCLID’S  GEOMETRY

He concludes, however, that lines which are powers, that is, incommensurable in square with the square on a Rational line, ought to be called
Irrational, from the 7th definition; just as above from the 6th definition we concluded that lines which can
[produce] areas commensurable with the square on the same Rational line ought to be called Rational. For lines which can
[produce] those incommensurable areas are lines incommensurable in power with a Rational line, from the 4th definition. Since therefore all lines
incommensurable in power are also incommensurable in length, as we said at definition 4, and it will be shown
in the corollary of proposition 9, it is manifest from the 7th definition that those lines which can [produce] areas incommensurable in square with the
square on a Rational line are called Irrational.

FURTHERMORE, since it is also not [the case that] Euclid and the ancient geometers used these expressions, “in length
and in power,” and “in power only,” adding them almost always with these terms: commensurable, and
incommensurable; but scarcely and very rarely: Rational, and Irrational: for they are rightly called
incommensurable in length and in power, or in power only; likewise incommensurable in length
and in power, or in length only; but less rightly Rational in length and in power, or in power
only, or Irrational in length and in power, or in length only. Which indeed, because Cam-
panus did not notice, gave occasion to many, that they have spoken variously about this in this book, about lines commensura-
ble and incommensurable, and also about Rational and Irrational.

MOREOVER, to these definitions we shall add later one other, and certain pronouncements, whose
use is found in this book.

POSTULATE, OR PETITION.

LET IT BE POSTULATED, that any magnitude can be multiplied so many times, until
it exceeds any magnitude of the same kind.

FOR if two unequal magnitudes of the same kind are proposed, since the greater is not infinite,
but the lesser can be increased infinitely; it is clear that the lesser can be multiplied so many times, until it surpasses the greater.
This is also established from those things which we wrote in definition 5 of book 5. For there we said that those magnitudes then at last
are of the same magnitude, when either can be multiplied so as to exceed the other. And from this condi-
tion’s definition, we taught that a rectilinear angle and an angle of contact are said to be of the same kind.

AXIOMS, OR COMMON NOTIONS.
I.

A MAGNITUDE measuring however many magnitudes, also measures the composite [magnitude] from
them.

II.

A MAGNITUDE measuring any magnitude, also measures every
magnitude which that [magnitude] measures.

III.

A MAGNITUDE measuring the whole magnitude, and the part taken away, also measures the remainder.

THESE axioms, as they pertain to numbers, later (they are by us in the last three pronouncements of book 7) [are placed] here.
Therefore since the same reasoning holds in magnitudes, there is no reason to suspect that their demonstrations must be repeated here:
especially since they can be transferred hither word for word, only changing the word “number” into the word “magnitude.”

MOREOVER because this was not to be omitted by us in the book, about the number which Theon marked in Euclid’s propositions,
as we shall say up to proposition 13, and likewise in all [cases], we did as Campanus did very often, as we teach at the beginning of the first book;
but why a double number in the margin and in the body of the propositions was to be set down,
of which the upper shows Theon’s order, the lower however shows Campanus’s series: But if only one
number is found in the margin, then there is no discrepancy between Theon and Campanus, that is,
it pertains to the same numbering of the propositions.

I.        THEOREM I.  PROPOSITION I.

TWO unequal magnitudes being proposed, if from the greater there be taken away
more than the half; and from that which remains, again there be taken away more than
the half; and this be always done: there will at length be left some magnitude which
will be less than the proposed lesser magnitude.

THERE are proposed two unequal magnitudes AB and C, of which AB is the greater. I say if
from AB there be taken away more than the half; and from that which remains, again more than the half,
and this be always done: there will at length be left in the magnitude some [part], which will be less than C. Let
C be multiplied so many times, until the magnitude made D E is greater than AB, so that D E is a multiple of C.
next