206                         EUCLID. GEOMETRY.

[uncertain: dine] and power, or power only: Likewise incommensurable in
length and power, or in length only:     But less correctly
Rational in length and power, or power only, or Irra-
tional in length and power, or in length only.     Which
indeed, since Campanus did not notice, gave occasion to
many, that various and obscurely in this 10th book, about lines
commensurable and incommensurable, and also Rational and Irra-
tional, they have spoken.

MOREOVER to these definitions we shall add one postulate,
and some common notions, whose use is found in this book.

        POSTULATE, OR PETITION.

LET IT BE POSTULATED, that any magnitude can so many times
be multiplied, until it exceed any magnitude of the
same kind.

FOR if two magnitudes of the same kind are proposed,
unequal, since the greater is not infinite; but the lesser can be
increased infinitely, it is clear that the lesser can so many times
be multiplied, until it surpass the greater. this is also established
from those things which we wrote in definition 5 of book 5.
For there we said that those magnitudes are then at last judged
to be of the same kind, when either can so be multiplied, that it
exceed the other And from the failure of this condition we taught
that a rectilinear angle, and an angle of contingency, are of a
different kind.

        AXIOMS OR COMMON
notions.
1.

A MAGNITUDE measuring however many magnitudes,
also measures the composite made from them.
II.

A MAGNITUDE measuring any magnitude,
also measures every magnitude which that
measures.
III.

A MAGNITUDE measuring the whole magnitude, and the
part taken away, also measures the remainder.

THESE axioms, as they pertain to numbers, were shown by us in
the last three common notions of book 7. Therefore since the same
reason holds in magnitudes, there is no need that we in vain
repeat their demonstrations here; especially since they can be
transferred hither word for word, only the word “number” being
changed into the word “magnitude”.

CÆTE-