102        EUCLID’S  GEOMETRY

I N F E R S, however, that lines which can produce areas incommensurable with the square on a Rational line ought to be
called Irrational, from Def. 7; just as above from Def. 6 we inferred that lines which can produce areas commensurable
with the same square on a Rational line ought to be called Rational. For lines which can produce those incommensurable
areas are lines incommensurable in power with the Rational line, from Def. 4. Therefore since all lines incommensurable
in power are also incommensurable in length, as we said at Def. 4, and as will be shown in the corollary of Prop. 9, it is
manifest from Def. 7 that those lines which can produce areas incommensurable with the square on a Rational line are to be
called Irrational.

M O R E O V E R  it is not to be omitted that Euclid and the ancient geometers almost always add these words, “in length
and in power,” and “in power only,” to these terms: commensurable and incommensurable; but scarcely and very rarely to
these: Rational and Irrational. For it is rightly said: incommensurable in length and in power, or in power only. Likewise
incommensurable in length and in power, or in length only. But it is less rightly said: Rational in length and in power, or in
power only; or Irrational in length and in power, or in length only. Which, because Campanus did not notice, gave occasion
to many to speak variously in this 10th book about lines commensurable and incommensurable, and also Rational and Irrational.

B U T  to these definitions we shall add one postulate, and some pronouncements, the use of which is found in this book.

POSTULATE, OR PETITION.

I T  I S  R E Q U E S T E D that any magnitude can be multiplied so many times until
it exceeds any magnitude of the same kind.

F O R  if two unequal magnitudes of the same kind are proposed, since the greater is not infinite, but the lesser can be
increased infinitely, it is clear that the lesser can be multiplied so many times until it surpasses the greater. This is also
evident from those things which we wrote in Def. 5 of Book 5. For there we said that magnitudes are then considered
with respect to the same magnitude when either is able to be multiplied so as to exceed the other. And from this condition
we taught that a rectilinear angle and a contingent angle are said to be of a kind.

AXIOMS, OR PRONOUNCEMENTS.
I.
A  M A G N I T U D E which measures magnitudes in any way, also measures the magnitude composed of them.

II.
A  M A G N I T U D E which measures any magnitude, also measures every magnitude which that magnitude measures.

III.
A  M A G N I T U D E which measures the whole magnitude and the part taken away, also measures the remainder.
T H E S E axioms, insofar as they pertain to numbers, were for the most part stated by us in Book 7 here.
Therefore since the same reasoning holds in magnitudes, there is no need to repeat here superfluous demonstrations of things,
especially since they can be transferred here word for word, only changing the word “number” into the word “magnitude.”

B U T  because in this book it was necessary for us to depart from the numbering which Theon follows in Euclid’s propositions,
as we shall say at Prop. 13, and as in all things we have followed Campanus’s example, as we taught at the beginning of the
first book; therefore we wished that a double number be placed in the margin and in the body of the propositions, of which
the upper shows Theon’s order, the lower Campanus’s series. But if only one number is found in the margin, then we judge
that there is no discrepancy between Theon and Campanus, as far as the numbering of the propositions is concerned.

I.        THEOREM I.  PROPOSITION I.

W I T H  two unequal magnitudes proposed, if from the greater there be taken away
more than the half; and from what remains, again there be taken away more than
the half; and if this is always done: there will at last be left some magnitude which
will be less than the lesser proposed magnitude.

L E T  there be proposed two unequal magnitudes AB and C, of which AB is the greater. I say that if from
AB there be taken away more than the half, and from what remains again more than the half, and if this is
always done, there will at last be left some magnitude which is less than C. For let C be multiplied so many
times until the magnitude made DE is greater than AB, so that DE is a multiple of C.
next