278

Commentary on the Tenth Book

II.

A magnitude measuring any magnitude;
also measures every magnitude which
that magnitude measures.

III.

A magnitude measuring a whole magnitude,
and a part taken away; also measures the remainder.

PROPOSITION I.

With two unequal magnitudes proposed,
if from the greater there be taken away
more than a half: and from what remains,
again there be taken away more than a half;
and this be always done: there will at last
be left some magnitude; which will be
less than the proposed lesser magnitude.

Supposition. Let two unequal magnitudes,
AB, the greater, C, the lesser, be given; and from
the greater AB, let more than a half be taken away;
and from the remainder also more than a half;
and so on: I say that at last there is left
a magnitude less than the given lesser C.

A  B.   C.
      C D.

Construction. Let there be conceived to the lesser
given magnitude C an added part D, equal
to the given greater magnitude AB.

Demonstration. From the whole CD as from the whole
AB, let more than a half be taken away from the givens,
the remainder will be either equal to C, or less,
or greater than C. If the first; again taking away
more than a half from the remainder, there will be left
something less than C, and therefore also from the equal
AB, the greater, by making a like subtraction, the
remainder will be something less than C: if the second,
we have attained our end: If the third, by taking away
again more than a half from the remainder; and so on;
so that while the subtraction is made, something is taken
from the given lesser C; at length there will be left
something less than C, otherwise the remaining part would be greater,
the whole given C, contrary to axiom 8. book 1. But it is to be noted
that this proposition ought to be understood of magnitudes
properly comparable according to
definition 5. book 5, and not of others which
can be improperly compared. From these is gathered
the solution of Cardan’s paradox concerning the angle
of contact in proposition 16. book 3, and the acute
rectilinear angle; which we propose in this place by way
of our corollary: because it seems plainly to contradict
this proposition.

OUR COROLLARY.

An acute rectilinear angle can in infinitum
(syncategorematically) be diminished; and an angle of contact
can in infinitum also be increased: and yet some decrease
of the former will be greater than any
increase of the latter.

For example, an acute rectilinear angle
EDF can be diminished in infinitum by
intermediate straight lines from the point D
inclined between the straight lines ED, FD,
for diminishing: and the angle of contact CAB increased
by smaller circles touching the same
straight line BA at the point A, having their center
on the same diameter, AG of the greater given circle
ACG. And yet because by the cited prop. 16.
book 3 of the Elements, every rectilinear angle
is greater than any angle of contact,
e.g. DAB, greater than another given CAB;
a smaller decrease of that rectilinear angle
is greater than a greater increase of the angle
of contact. Thus the paradox was proposed by
Cardan. Now we shall set it forth as it is thought
to contradict this proposition. The angular magnitude
EDF, an acute rectilinear, is greater
than the magnitude of the angle of contact CAB, by
the cited prop. 16. book 3, and by prop. 9. book 1 we can
divide the given angle EDF into halves,
and draw another straight line between
that intermediate and the half of this angle
from the point D of the given angle, which will take away
something greater than the half of the given angle: and so on
to infinity; and yet from the cited prop. 16. book
3, the remaining angle, when it becomes acute and rectilinear,
will always be greater than the given magnitude
of the angle of contact: therefore this first proposition
of this book will be false, since after
that continuous subtraction, there will not be left from
the greater given magnitude, namely the given acute
rectilinear angle EDF, a lesser angular magnitude,
less than the given magnitude of the angle of
contact CAB.

Solution of the paradox. Since these two
magnitudes, of an acute rectilinear angle and
of a given angle of contact, cannot properly
be compared to one another, according to def. 5. book 5, because as
we have shown, however much it be increased and
increased to infinity, that is, however much that
angle of contact be multiplied, it cannot surpass a rectilinear
angle

Digitized by Google