E U C L I D.  E L E M E N T S.  G E O.

from the same actions or passions understanding is acquired by us: but this certainty is then present, when
we suppose, or understand, the nature or origin of the quantity of a line, that is, its denomination: because
truly it is permitted for us to propose any (as we said in the preface) that which has been proposed we shall
call certain.

Definition sixth.

And those which are commensurable with this, either in length & power, or in
power only, [are] certain.

Definition seventh.

But those which are incommensurable with the same in length & power, are
called uncertain.

Since I said that a straight line can be made commensurable with a straight line, in power only, and moreover
another in power & length, all these which are certain, or exist commensurable either in power only, or indeed in length
and power together, are likewise to be called certain. For it is sufficient that some straight line be called certain, that it be
joined with a certain proposed [line] by some commensuration, of length, or of power. But on the contrary an uncertain [line]
is said [to be] that which has no commensuration with a certain proposed [line], whether compared by its length, or by its own
power. But why Euclid called that line certain, which, being proposed, exists commensurable with a certain [line] in power only,
although in length it is incommensurable with the same proposed [line], some seem to be ignorant. For since the affinity of
geometrical quantities, which is called ratio, is divided by a principal disjunction into known and unknown. But the known is to be
expressed by numbers only, Euclid follows the nature of numbers in expressing the relations of quantities: for although every number
is the side of some square, yet not every number as side has a square, but all numbers among themselves are commensurable. It follows
therefore if the square of a line which has been proposed as certain is incommensurable in length, is commensurable with the square
of the certain [line] itself (that is, if by some units of numbers the same measure measures both squares) those [squares] will be said
to have the ratio of numbers to one another (namely, repeating a common measure) but squares arise from sides drawn into themselves.
Therefore it follows that those lines which, drawn into themselves, generate areas having the ratio of numbers (that is, certain), cannot
be deprived of this certainty, because they generate units to themselves which are also certain. Wherefore for this cause he called certain
(as Euclid found), but the rest on the contrary, which, drawn into themselves, produce incommensurable areas, and therefore have length
and power incommensurable, he called uncertain, and [those] have to the certain an unknown ratio, because whatever units are applied to them,
are incommensurable with one another, and have an uncertain ratio.

A D M O N I T I O N.

But Campanus & Zambertius translated this certain [as] rational in Latin, far indeed from the Greek
exemplar, but as the Greek [has] this word ῥητὴ, which more truly is read for certain, determined and manifest,
and moreover would agree more with this sense, certain, than rational. For the word rational of itself bears a habit,
either by action, or by passion. For if rational is said of a certain proposed [line] by action, because it has some ratio to another, or by
passion, because another has a ratio to it, this denomination not only suits it, but also whatever things are incommensurable with it, even
uncertain ones. For those have to others of the same genus (as to dimensions) a ratio known among themselves as certain, to others
but to the certain it has a ratio, since they are of the same genus as to quantity (by the third definition of the fifth) yet unknown. Therefore
all deserve to be called rational, because they have ratio among themselves. But to others, which would be confused and therefore absurd, no otherwise
than if we should call some single line rational, from having ratio, for a single line does not have ratio, since ratio requires at least two terms.
Therefore those proposed straight lines cannot aptly be named rational, but certain or determined, &c. Besides, neither do we see Euclid to have called
those rational, but certain. But that Campanus and Zambertius took that to themselves only, wherefore since Theon wrote with the word λογου added to this ῥητῷ
in this seventh definition, not with Euclid’s Greek word (by which he would rather have said ἀῤῥητον for uncertain) but it is manifest, and that he, outside Euclid’s
meaning, brought forth the word irrational, which by privation of ratio he would call uncertain magnitudes, which among themselves, as we said, have a
certain & known ratio, but to the certain although unknown or indeterminate have ra-
tios