206                     EUCLID. GEOM.

[uncertain: dine] and in power, or in power only: likewise incommensurable only
in length and in power, or in length only: but I rightly [call] Rational
in length and in power, or in power only, or Irrational
in length and in power, or in length only. Which indeed, since
Campanus did not notice, gave occasion to many, to speak
wrongly and obscurely in this 10th book about commensurable lines,
and incommensurable, and also about Rational and Irrational.
  ( ÆLFRÆM to these definitions we shall add one postulate, and
pronouncements, whose use is found in this book.

POSTULATE, OR PETITION.
LET IT BE POSTULATED, that any magnitude can so many times
be multiplied, until it exceed any magnitude of the
same kind.
  FOR, two magnitudes of the same kind being proposed unequal,
since the greater is not infinite, but the lesser can be increased infinitely,
it is clear that the lesser can so many times be multiplied, until it surpass the
greater. This is also evident from those things which in definition 5 of book 5 we wrote.
For there we said that two magnitudes are then at last of the same kind, when
the one can thus be multiplied so that it exceed the other. And from the lack of this
condition, we taught that a rectilinear angle and an angle of contingency
are of different kinds.

AXIOMS OR PRONOUNCE-
ments.
I.
A MAGNITUDE measuring however many magnitudes,
also measures the composite from them.
II.
A MAGNITUDE measuring any magnitude,
also measures every magnitude which that [magnitude]
measures.
III.
A MAGNITUDE measuring the whole magnitude, and the
removed [part], also measures the remainder.
  THESE axioms, insofar as they pertain to numbers, have been shown by us in
the last three pronouncements of book 7. Therefore since the same reasoning holds in
magnitudes, there is no need to repeat their demonstrations here,
especially since they can be transferred hither word for word, only the
word “number” being changed into the word “magnitude”.

THE REST.