TENTH BOOK.                                                                 98

they comprehend, being comprehended under two commensurable sides, which indeed, the units
numbering the whole rectangle, will be. But since the length and breadth of any unit are certain
lines, since they are certain commensurable [lines]. These will produce a certain rectangle, whose
length and breadth are determined, that is, itself. But if to it there be compared another certain
[one] proposed, commensurable with it in power only, but in length by no means. Therefore, as it is
[that] the units of those lines are incommensurable, by hypothesis. Wherefore the rectangle under
the unit of a certain line, and the other unit incommensurable with the former, is uncertain and
indeterminate. For the one certain dimension of it, the other uncertain [one] makes indeterminate.
Therefore a rectangle consisting of these indeterminate units will be uncertain and indeterminate,
that is, something of the nature of that which is made from the proposed [one]. But if to the same
proposed [one] there be offered two [lines] commensurable in power only (but mutually commensurable
in length) which comprehend a rectangle, it is fair that the units of that rectangle be contained under
lines incommensurable with the certain [one], equally according to length and breadth. And nevertheless
to be certain: for it is contained under lines commensurable with each other in length, and with each
other in power (and commensurable with the proposed [one]). But because their power is commensurable
with the certain proposed [one], it will follow that the rectangle comprehended under them, and composed
from these units, is commensurable with the square of the certain [one] (and therefore certain). Indeed
a rectangle consisting of the same square units, will construct [something] commensurable in power with
the same square, [and] it will become commensurable.

First Proposition.

Two unequal magnitudes being set out, if from the greater there be taken
more than the half, and from what is left more than the half,
and this be done often, there will at length be left a magnitude less than the
lesser magnitude set out.

Let two magnitudes A K and G D be set out: and from A the
greater let there be taken from G more than the half (namely
D Z, and again from the remainder G Z more than the half,
namely Z I, and let it be done often: I say that at length it is possible to leave
a magnitude G I less than the magnitude A K, the lesser magnitude set out. Let there be added to A K
so many equals as exceed some D, by the 4th def. of the fifth, and let them be K N, K T and T B. As many
times as A B is cut at T and K, so many times let G D be cut, by taking away often more than the half
at Z and I; and since A B is greater than G D, but from A B there is taken T B not more than the half, and
from the remainder G D there is taken Z D more than the half, the remainder G Z will therefore be less than
the remainder A K. By the same reasoning again, because from the greater A T there will be taken K T not
more than the half, and from the lesser G Z there will be taken, by hypothesis, Z I more than the half, it will
follow that the remainder G I is less than the remainder A K, that is, than the lesser magnitude set out.
Therefore, two magnitudes being set out, etc.        Otherwise, where only the half is taken from the greater
often, let A K be doubled until it, as the lesser, exceed the greater G D at T and B; let G D be cut
into two equal parts at I and Z, which are I G and Z I: since as the whole A B is to the half A T, so is A T to A K, so
are G D to G Z and G Z to G I (namely in doubling) the ratio will be equal: as A B to A K, so will be
G D to G I (by the 22nd of the fifth) but A B is greater than G D (by hypothesis) therefore A K will be greater than
G I (by the 14th of the fifth) and hence, by taking away the half from G, it becomes less than A K.

NOTICE.

There were not lacking those who wished to restrict the immense power of this theorem to
quantities, with an opposing argument from the sixteenth of the third, among whom the chief was
Campanus, when he says that the angle of contact (is always left less than any rectilinear angle. From
which, if more than the half has been taken away often, therefore it seems that a vain exception must be
made to this theorem. But he resolves this argument, saying that these angles are not univocally called
angles, and that the curved and the straight are different kinds, which we by no means can admit. For
rectilinear angles and angles of contact are the same kind, as to quantity, although as to commensuration
they are different; for the quantity of angles is contained in the inclination alone of lines, as whatever
inclination has been greater, lesser, or equal, the quantity—