B O O K  X.                                                                 201

[The following is a literal English rendering, lineated to match the original as closely as possible.]

it is absent. But I would think that that treatment of roots is required, so that
this book may be understood more easily. I would not deny however, that he
who has held the theory of roots and calculation, will perceive this book with
greater pleasure, than he who is altogether ignorant of them, because
that man can bring the demonstrations back to use, but this one in no way.
For this cause also we adapted the prior ten theorems of the second book
to numbers, so that the studious man might take from it greater delight
of mind, and profit; but not that we think those things which are demonstrated
in that book can be understood more easily from numbers. Why
therefore (someone will say) as in that book, not likewise also in this
examples of numbers, which Algebra uses, did you employ, so that that thing
might be both for greater pleasure, and convenience to readers? The cause is at hand,
why we thought it should be omitted. For since very few are at this time
to whom that most celebrated art of Algebra is known, those numbers
seemed, if they were applied, to pour out rather darkness, than to give
something of greater light, and clarity; indeed thus the minds of the studious
for help, and light, which we labor to bring by these our commentaries,
would take more inconvenience, and would perceive the demonstrations
themselves less: which could not happen in book 2, since
addition of whole numbers, and multiplication, which alone
were necessary there, almost no one is who does not know. To this is added, that
those who are practiced in Algebra can with easy business adapt the demonstrations
of this book to numbers by themselves, when they
wish; especially since now this very thing not long before by Michael Stufelius,
a noble arithmetician, in the 2nd book of the work, which he entitled On Whole
Arithmetic, has been done diligently, and accurately.

A N D  S O, that we may return to the plan, Euclid beginning the matter itself,
in his manner, from explanations of the words, which will have to be used:
declares in the first place, what magnitudes are called commensurable,
defining them to be those which the same measure
measures. As two magnitudes A, B, which the same
measure, C, measures; (for C measures A itself,
repeated four times, and B itself taken three times,) are called commensurable.
In the same way commensurable are, a line of 20 palms and
a line of 13 palms: because those lines a line of one palm, as well as of a half
palm, as well as of a third part of one palm, etc. measures. Likewise
commensurable are called surfaces, which one and the same surface
measures; likewise bodies, or solids commensurable, which the same
body, or solid, measures.

A
B
C

II.

I N C O M M E N S U R A B L E, however, are those for which it happens that no
common measure can be found.
S U C H magnitudes are, the diameter of any square, and the side
of the same, since they have no common measure, as is pro-
n 5                                    position