B O O K  T E N T H.                                                     103.

commensurable in length only; but some in length and in power, as this will be demonstrated
in various places in the book. For Euclid does not wish it to be shown from what has been said that they are rational,
(although the words may seem to sound this) that they are so: but he only indicates to us, if some are found in some way
commensurable, that some may be said to be commensurable with the proposed straight line in length and in power, which are either in power only, etc. Which
indeed follows from the definition just now, but will be demonstrated in what follows, as we said.

But that proposed line is said to be by reason; others are commensurable, or incommensurable, they are called
by the Greeks ῥηταὶ; but by the Latins Rationales; because it is always set down as certain and known, but the other, when compared
with it, does not always become known, although each by itself exists as simple, certain, and known: since any one in
proportion can be divided into equal parts.

V I.

And those commensurable with it either in length and in power, or in power only,
[are called] Rational.

He teaches that other lines, in whatever way commensurable with that which is called Rational, are also called
Rational; not indeed by position, as that one, but because when compared with it they are found commensurable with it either
in length and in power, or in power only.

Therefore, according to the meaning of Euclid, the square root of this number 20, or 1000, etc. Or what is the same,
the straight line whose square is 20, or 1000, etc. is called Rational; since in power it is commensurable with the
Rational [line], (for 14 is a number of 20 because [illegible]: commensurable with any square number, as 16 or 100,
etc.) although in length it is incommensurable with the same. Therefore not a few arithmeticians are deceived, who
for that reason call it Irrational, because it cannot be expressed by number.

V I I.

But those incommensurable with it are called Irrational.

Because in the preceding definition Euclid called those lines Rational which are commensurable with the proposed Rational straight line
in length and in power, or in power only; it is clearly established that here he calls those Irrational which are incommensurable
with the proposed Rational straight line in both ways; namely in length and in power: but not in length only. From which it is also
manifest that the square root of this number 20, or 1000, etc. (or (what is the same) the line whose square is 20, or 1000, etc.)
cannot be called Irrational, since it is not incommensurable with the proposed Rational line in length and in power, but in length only.

V I I I.

And the square which is made from the proposed straight line is called Rational.

Just as he calls that line Rational which is set down as certain and known: so also he calls the square described on it
Rational, because it itself is certain and known, in comparison with which other surfaces are said to be commensurable
or incommensurable.

I X.

And those commensurable with it indeed [are called] Rational.

All plane surfaces commensurable with the square of the proposed Rational line are called Rational;
not indeed by position, as that one, but because when compared with it they are found either commensurable with it, or in-
commensurable: just as also lines which are in whatever way commensurable with a Rational line are called
Rational.

But since lines which are powers are spaces commensurable with the square of the proposed Rational line,
at least in power commensurable with the Rational line, from the 3rd definition; it is clear that they too
must be called Rational by definition 6.

X.

But those incommensurable with it are called Irrational.

Plane surfaces incommensurable with the square described on a Rational line are not otherwise called Irrational
than lines which are altogether incommensurable with the proposed Rational [line] are called Irrational.

X I.

And straight lines which can [produce] them, [are called] Irrational: if indeed those [spaces] are squares, the sides themselves:
but if some other rectilinear [figure], the straight lines which describe squares equal to
spaces incommensurable [with it].

He calls lines Irrational which can produce spaces incommensurable with the square of a Rational line; just as he also called
the spaces themselves Irrational. Thus, if the incommensurable spaces are indeed squares,
their sides will be called Irrational; but if they are not squares, but any other rectilinear figure,
the straight lines which describe squares equal to those incommensurable spaces [are called] Irrational.

I 3