402

T E N T H

3  Straight lines commensurable in power are those
whose squares can be measured by one and the
same surface.

Straight lines are considered either according to their length, or
according to their power; and in
the one and the other way they are called commensurable and incommensurable. In the two
first definitions Euclid explained which are the commensurable and in-
commensurable lines considered according to their lengths, but in this one, and in the following,
he declares which are those called commensurable and incommensurable in power.
He says therefore here that the straight lines whose squares can be measured by one and the
same surface are commensurable in power: thus the straight lines AB and CD
will be called commensurable in power, since their squares AG and CH can
be measured by one and the same surface AG: likewise the straight lines CD and EF
will also be called commensurable in power, because their squares CH and EI
can be measured by the space or
square AG. similarly, applying
numbers to lines; a line
of 6 feet will be said commensurable
in power to another line of 5
feet, because their squares 9 and 36
can be measured by one and the same
surface. Thus also a line having
2 feet in length, and another 28
will be called commensurable in power, because their squares 4 and 8 are mea-
sured by one and the same superficial space: again, a line being √120, and another
√125 will likewise be called commensurable in power, because their squares
120 and 125 are measured by one and the same surface 5: for it is two times in
120, and 5 times in 125.
Now it is to be noted that all straight lines commensurable in length are also so in
power; for the squares of those lines are measured by the square of their common
measure, as appears in the three first examples above.

4  But straight lines incommensurable in power
are those whose squares have no common
surface that can measure them.

As for example, one line being of 2 feet, and another √6, those two
lines will be called incommensurable in power, because there is no surface that
measures their squares 4 and √6: likewise √8 and √12 will also be called incommen-
surable in power, for no superficial space measures their squares 8 and √12.
Now it is here to be noted that all lines (or numbers) incommensurable in power are
also so in length; but not conversely. Thus a line of 2 feet will indeed be
incommensurable in length with another line of √8: but not in power:
and 2 which is incommensurable in power with √8, is also so in length.

E  F  C  D  A  B
G  H  I