❦ EUCLID. GEOM. ❦                         ❦ BOOK  X. ❦ 6
                 X.

But these incommensurable [things], let them be called Irra-
tional.

  N O T otherwise are plane surfaces described by a square from a Rational line
called incommensurable, Irrational, than are li-
nes which, being set out to a Rational [line], are wholly incommensurable,
called Irrational.

                 XI.

And straight lines which themselves can [do so], [are called] Irrationa-
l: if indeed those squares are [such], the sides themselves;
but if [it is] some other rectilinear [figure], the straight lines which
describe squares equal to spaces incommensurable.

  H E calls lines which can [produce] spaces incommensurable to the square of a Ratio-
nal line, Irrational; just as also the spaces themselves [are] called Irrational: So that if incommensu-
rable squares indeed they shall have been, the sides of them are called
Irrational; but if they shall not have been squares, but any other
rectilinear figures, they are called the straight lines which describe
squares equal to those incommensurable spaces, Irra-
tional.

  I T  I S  G A T H E R E D however, that lines having power [to produce] spaces incom-
mensurable to the square of a Rational line ought to be called Irratio-
nal, from the 7th definition; just as above from the 6th definition we gather-
ed that lines which can [produce] spaces commensurable to the same square
of a Rational line ought to be called Rational. For those
which can [produce] those incommensurable spaces are in power
incommensurable to the Rational line, from the 4th definition. Since there-
fore all lines in power incommensurable are also incom-
mensurable in length, as at definition 4 we said, and it will be shown
in the corollary of proposition 9; it is manifest, from the 7th definition, that the lines
which can [produce] spaces incommensurable to the square of a Ra-
tional line are called Irrational.

I T  I S  A L S O  T O  B E  P A S S E D  O V E R not, that Euclid and
the ancient Geometers with this word: in length and in power, and
in power only, almost always add to those words: commen-
surable, and incommensurable: But scarcely, and very rarely,
to these: Rational, and Irrational: For lines are rightly called
commensurable in length and in power, or in power only;
Likewise incommensurable in length and in power, or in length
only: But less rightly Rational in length and in
power, or in power only, or Irrational in length and
power, or in length only. Which indeed, since
Campanus did not notice, provided occasion to many, that
variously and obscurely in this 10th book concerning commensurable lines,
and incommensurable, and also Rational, Irrational
they might speak.

B U T  F U R T H E R, to these definitions we shall add one postu-
late, and some propositions, the use of which is found in this
book.

P O S T U L A T E,
or Petition.

LET IT BE POSTULATED, that any
magnitude can be multiplied so many times, un-
til it exceed any magnitude of the same
kind.

  F O R, two magnitudes of the
same kind being proposed unequal, since the greater is not infinite,
but the lesser can be increased infinitely; it is evident
that the lesser can be multipli-
ed so many times, until it surpass
the greater.

M X 10.