EUCLID. GEOMETRY.

their squares are incommensurable. Therefore those lines that are incommensurable in length, whose squares are commensurable, are here by Euclid called commensurable in power;
because, namely, according to their powers, that is, according to their squares (for, as we said at prop. 47 of book I, the power of any line is the square described on it) they are commensurable, although they themselves according to length are altogether incommensurable.

B U T if anyone should ask why Euclid defined separately lines commensurable in power, and not commensurable in length; it must be answered that lines commensurable in length are (as above) explained in the definition of commensurable magnitudes, since one common measure measures lines of this kind, as has been said. But because no common measure can measure lines commensurable in power, but only their squares measure the same space, therefore it was altogether necessary that they be explained by a proper definition.

III.

INCOMMENSURABLES how-
ever, when with their squares no space,
which is a common measure of them, hap-
pens to be found.

T H E remaining lines incommensurable in length, whose squares also are incommensurable, he calls in-
commensurable in power.

B U T lines commensurable both in length and in power have, as it were, this agreement among themselves and connection, that as lines commensurable in length are also commensurable in power, so that no lines can be given commensurable in length, whose squares are not also commensurable: because the square described from their common measure measures, as a common measure, their squares, as in the subjoined figure ap-
pears:

I   H
G
F C   D A B

BOOK X. 4

appears: for just as the straight line A B measures the straight line C D, E F, so also it measures the squares A G, the squares C H, E I: But not so that all lines commensurable in power are also commensurable in length; for many lines are commensurable in power, that is, have commensurable squares, which nevertheless are altogether incommensurable in length, as will be demonstrated in this book. Again among lines incommensurable both in length and in power, such a connection is found, that all lines incommensurable in power are also incommensurable in length; but not conversely, that all lines incommensurable in length are also incommensurable in power, since many lines are found incommensurable with one another in length, while nevertheless in power, that is, according to their squares, they are commensurable. All which indeed will be clear from the corollary of proposition 9 of this book.

V.

THESE things being set down, it is shown that to any proposed straight
line there are infinitely many straight lines both commensurable and in-
commensurable: some indeed in length and power; others however in power
only. Let the proposed straight line be called Rational.

I F some straight line of known magnitude be proposed, of all other lines which are compared with it, some will have squares commensurable with it in length and in power, some however in power only: likewise some incommensurable with it in length only; some however in length and in power; as will be demonstrated in various places in this tenth book. For Euclid does not wish, from what has been said, to be shown or gathered (although his words may seem to sound so) that these things are so; but he only indicates to us, in the briefest way, that some lines can be said to be commensurable with the proposed straight line in length.
A 4