GEO.        ELE.        EV.

ells; and palms; and digits; or feet take a measure: these
are straight lines, in infinite multitude, commensurable and in-
commensurable. Commensurable indeed: either in power only,
or in power and in length together. Incommensurable
however: either in length only, or in length and in power together.
Therefore the same proposed straight line is called rational.   6
And those commensurable with it both in length and in power,
and in power only, are rational.   7
But those incommensurable in both ways, that is in
length and in power, are called irrational.   8
And the square indeed from the proposed straight line is
rational.   9
And those commensurable with it are irrational.   10
And that from an incommensurable is irrational.   11
And those commensurable with it are called irrational.   12
And their sides (if they are squares), if you please: other certain
straight lines, being in power equal, and describing squares equal to
those, are called irrational.

Euclid. Camp.                         Proposition 1
If two unequal magnitudes are proposed,
let the greater be diminished by more than its half, and again
let more than the half be taken from the remainder, and then likewise
in the same way: it is necessary that at length, of the lesser of the
proposed, a lesser magnitude be left.
CAMP. (There are two unequal magnitudes a and b c; b c the greater, I say that
so many times more than the half can be taken away from b c or its remainder, that it will be
necessary that the remaining magnitude be less than a. Let a be multiplied so many times until it
exceed b c; let its multiple d e be greater than b c. Therefore let more than the half be taken away from b c,
which becomes f g; and from the remainder which is g b, let more than the half be
taken, which becomes g h. Let this also be done so many times until b c has been divided into as many parts
as many times as a is contained in d e. I say then that the last remainder, as here
h c, is less than a. For let h c be multiplied as many times as a has been multiplied in d e
f; let its multiple be k l m. Therefore since each of the magnitudes k, l, m is
equal to h c, it follows that k is less than b g; but also l is less than g h; and since m
is equal to h c, by subtraction k l m will be less than b c; therefore less than d e f.
Since therefore d e f is to a as k l m is to h c, and d e f is greater than k l m, it follows by
the 14th of the fifth that a is greater than h c, which is the thing proposed. The same follows if from the greater
half be taken, and again from the remainder half: and let it be done so many times until the
greater is divided into as many parts as the lesser is contained in any of its
multiples exceeding the greater of the proposed by any amount.
CAMPANUS Annotation. (But it must be observed that this proposition seems to contradict the fifteenth of the third,
proposing that the angle of contact is less than any angle contained by two straight lines.
For if any rectilinear angle be set out, if more than the half be taken from it,
and again more than the half from the remainder, it seems necessary that this can be done so many times until a rectilinear angle
smaller than the angle of contact is left: the opposite of which he syllogizes in the third.
But these are not univocal angles; for curved and straight are not simply of the same genus.
But indeed neither can an angle of contact be taken so many times of contact, that it exceed any rectilinear angle,
which is necessary, as is clear from the foregoing demonstration) to this

c
k
l
m
f
h
g
e
d
a
b