BOOK.

❡ The tenth, most excellent, most difficult book of Euclid concerning thirteen
irrational lines: and with the interpretation of the excellent Campanus.
Master Luca Pacioli of Borgo San Sepolcro. By
divine [illegible]. Most accurate corrector. Begins.

Quantities in which there is one
quantity measuring them,
are called commensurable; but those in which
there is one quantity not
measuring them are called incommen-
surable. 2 ❡ Lines commensurable in power
are called those whose square
surfaces one surface measures.
3 ❡ Lines incommensurable in
power are called those whose square
surfaces one surface does not
measure; and since it is so,
it is manifest that to every line many others are incommen-
surable: some in length only, some in length and in
power. 4 ❡ But let the line with which we reason, being set down, be called
rational. 5 ❡ Lines commensurable with it are called rational. 6 ❡ But those
incommensurable with the same are called irrational or surd. 7 ❡ But the square
surface which, by hypothesis, is measured by the rational [line], is called rational.
8 ❡ And surfaces commensurable with it are called rational. 9 ❡ But surfaces
incommensurable with the same are called irrational or surd.
10 ❡ And the sides which produce those squares are called irra-
tional. 11 ❡ Any quantity can be multiplied so many times that
it exceeds any given quantity of the same kind.

❡ Proposition 1.

If from two unequal proposed quantities
more than half is taken away from the greater, and likewise from the remainder
more than half is taken away successively in the same way:
it is necessary that at length a quantity less than the lesser of the proposed
quantities will be left.

a  e  f  k  l  m
7  7  7 2  2  b 2
a
b  c
7  7  3  2
z

❡ Let there be two unequal quantities, a.f and b.c; I say that
as often as more than half can be taken away from a.b.c, or from its remainder,
it is necessary that a quantity less than a [be left]. Let a be multiplied n times
as many as it exceeds b.c; and let its multiple be d.e.f, greater than b.c.
Let more than half be taken away from a.b.c, namely b.g; and likewise from the remainder
which is g.e, more than half, namely g.h. And let this also be done so many times until
b.c has been divided into as many parts as a is contained in d.e.f. ❡ I say then that the last remainder,
as is h.i, is less than a. Let a be multiplied by as many times as b.c is multiplied in d.e.f,
and let its multiple be k.l.m. ❡ Therefore since each of the quantities k.l.i is equal
to b.c, it follows that f.k is less than b.g; but f.l is less than g.h; and since m is equal
to b.c, it will by the definition be that k.l is less than b.c; therefore d.e.f is less
since therefore d.e.f is to a as k.l.m is to b.c, and d.e.f is greater than k.l.m, it follows by 4
of the fifth that a is greater than b.c, which is the thing proposed. ❡ And this follows if from the greater
half is taken away, and likewise from the remainder half; and if as many times as the greater
is divided into as many parts as the lesser is contained in any of its multiples,
the greater exceeds any proposed quantity. ❡ But it must be observed that
this seems to contradict the fifth of the third, proposing an angle of contact
to be less than any angle contained by two straight lines, after n, any
rectilinear angle; if from it more than half be taken away, and likewise from the remainder
more than half, it seems necessary that this can be done so many times until the angle