BOOK X.                                                                 205

so that lines commensurable in length are also commensurable
in power, so that no lines can be given commensurable in
length whose squares are commensurable; because the square
described on their common measure measures their squares
as a common measure of their squares, as appears in the
figure set below: for just as the straight line AB measures the
straight lines CD.EF, so also the square AG measures the
squares CH, EI: But not [so] that all lines commensurable in
power are also commensurable in length; for many lines are
commensurable in power, that is, have commensurable squares,
which nevertheless are altogether incommensurable in length,
as will be demonstrated in this book.
Again among lines incommensurable both in length and in
power, such a connection is found, that all lines incommensurable
in power are also incommensurable in length;
But not conversely, that all lines incommensurable in length
are also incommensurable in power, since many lines are found
incommensurable in length with one another, while nevertheless
in power, that is, according to their squares, they are commensurable.
All which indeed will be clear from the corollary, proposition 9
of this book.

                         V.

These things being set down, it is shown that to any proposed
straight line there are infinitely many straight lines both commensurable
and incommensurable: some indeed in length and
power; but others in power only. Let the proposed straight
line be called Rational.

IF some straight line be proposed, of known magnitude, there will be
of all others which are compared with it, some commensurable with it
in length and in power, but some in power only.
Likewise some incommensurable with it in length only, and some
in length and in power, as will be demonstrated in various places
in this tenth book. For Euclid does not wish it to be shown or
collected from what has been said (although his words may seem
to sound thus) that these things are so:
but he only indicates to us, and in a certain way hints, that of lines
some can be said to be commensurable with the proposed straight line
in length and in power, but others in power only, etc. Which
indeed in no way follows from what has been said, but will be
demonstrated in what follows, as we said.

BUT that proposed line, by the reason of which others are commensurable
or incommensurable, is called by the Greeks ῥητὴ; but by the Latins Rational,
because it is always set down as certain and known, but others compared
with it are not always known, although each taken separately exists as certain
and known; since any one can be divided into however many equal parts.
Ef

[diagram labels:]
I  H  G
E  F  C  D  A  B