❧ EUCLID’S DEMONSTRATIO-
NS restored, Book Ten.

First Definition.

Commensurable magnitudes are said to be those which the same mea-
sure measures.

In the earlier books Euclid set down what is most necessary for the last three,
for the understanding of quantity, through the operation of the relation of one
to another, so that, the quantity of one magnitude being known, by its use
without the help of the other proposed magnitude we may know the quantity
of the other, and indeed so precisely or exactly, that nothing more is required
for the understanding of their quantities. But what Euclid will propose in this
tenth [book] looks to another task. For with these quantities known by their
nature to the understanding, he will teach, with the service of numbers, to
generate the quantities of uncertain magnitudes. And although how they differ,
from known ones he is compelled to keep uncertainly silent (because the
knowledge of nature is hidden from us), nevertheless by the laws of the
proportional or known [magnitudes], what affinity those unknown or uncertain
ones have among themselves he will be able easily to set forth. Therefore
Euclid, beginning from the chief bond of known quantities, namely that by
which the relation of one magnitude to another (which is called ratio) is,
takes commensurable magnitudes to mean those which the same magnitude
(which they call a common measure) so precisely determines, that it determines
one of them by certain units repeated, and the other likewise by however many
of the same units repeated, precisely; these may be called commensurable, that
is, having a common measure. And he said this so that he might teach how
they differ from those which the same unit cannot complete both by any
repetitions (as the next definition makes clear).

Second Definition.

Incommensurable [magnitudes] are those which fall under the dimension
of no common measure.

Incommensurables, by a name opposite to the former, he calls those magnitudes
which allow no common measure to complete them. But any magnitude, by
repetitions composing toward one of them, will be excluded from the dimension
of the other: for by repetitions it will either exceed the remainder, or indeed
fall short of it, namely by that part of the quantity which can be denominated
by no number (expressing the former). And we say “expressing the former”
for this reason, that the former, which we define as commensurable, are
composed from numbers of equal units, by diverse or equal repetitions of those
units. But these incommensurables, composed from quantities of units different
from the first, allow no common measure between themselves, because between
them there is a different kind of measure, though contained under the same
kind of quantity, but not under the same kind of measure. Therefore those
which have a different kind of measure will be incommensurable, just as those
having the same kind of measure we call commensurable. But it must be noted
that that one kind of measure alone among all cannot be said to be commensurable.
But since any other kinds of measures (each for itself) measure commensurable
magnitudes, any first assumed [measure] of their kind can be taken as
commensurable, so that the magnitudes of any other kinds of measure, compared
to these, ought deservedly to be called incommensurable. And therefore we
shall confess that commensuration follows the same kind of measure, and as it
were different kinds of measure follow incommensuration, whence indeed this
diversity arises, although another may desire an investigation of our opinion.
Yet, that we may set forth in a few words what may produce it, we ought to
remember that numbers are not quantity, as we said in numbers, but are
adaptable to quantities of the mind. Therefore when a number is adapted to
some quantity, this quantity is cut into as many equal parts as there are units
in the adapted number; for all the units of numbers are equal. If therefore to
this quantity another quantity is compared, and the precise units (taken by any
art) nowhere result, but for expressing it the unit is compelled to be cut, con
Ia