4

EUCLID’S
but in power, that is, according to their squares, they are commensurable. Which things indeed will all be clear from the corollary of
proposition 9 of this book.

DEFINITION V.

THESE things being set down, it is shown that to any proposed straight line there are infinitely many straight lines both commensurable and
incommensurable: some indeed in length and in power, others truly in power only. Let the proposed straight line be called
Rational.

TO EVERY proposed line, all other lines which are compared to it will be either commensurable or
incommensurable.

Commensurable indeed, if those lines which are compared to the proposed line have with the
proposed line some common measure measuring both; as if the line a is proposed, and
b and c are compared to it, it is evident that those lines b and c are commensurable with the
proposed line a, since among themselves those lines have a common measure measuring both, namely d.

a
b
c
d

4
3
2
1

e
f
g
h

R V 8
R V 5
R V V 40
R V V 56

INCOMMENSURABLE however, if the lines which are compared to the proposed line
do not have any common measure; as if the lines e and f, irrational, are compared to a, because
between those lines no common measure is found, therefore they will be incommensurable in length with a, e,
and f, although in power they are commensurable.
Again if the lines g and h are compared to the rational a, then a, g and h will be among themselves both in length
and in power incommensurable.
In length indeed, since they have no common measure among themselves.
But in power, because their squares have no common area which can measure
the squares described on them.

FROM CLAVIUS.
But that proposed line, in respect of which other lines are commensurable or incommensurable, is called by the Greeks, and by the Latins
Rational, because it is always set down as fixed, so that it is not unknown; but the one compared to it is not always known, although each
taken separately exists as fixed and also known, since any one can be divided into however many equal parts.

DEFINITION VI.

AND those commensurable with it either in length and power, or in power
only, are Rational.

IF any line is commensurable with the proposed rational line either in length or in power, without
doubt that line is rational.
Hence it is gathered that every proposed line considered absolutely and simply is rational,
since it can be divided into as many equal parts as one pleases: therefore those commensurable with it either
in length and power together, or in power only, will be rational.

E X